<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-CA">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="appendix2" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2>Appendix 2: Canada’s Residential Schools</h2>
			<p>The Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSSA</abbr>) provides the most comprehensive listing of Canadian residential schools for Aboriginal people. At the time of approval, the Settlement Agreement listed 130 residential schools and residences. The Settlement Agreement also outlined a process by which additional schools could be added to the list of approved institutions. At the time of writing, nine institutions had been added to the list.<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref=1" epub:type="noteref">[1]</a></p>
			<p>The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSSA</abbr> list of approved schools has a number of limits.</p>
			<ul>
				<li>It was developed in the early twenty-first century as part of a process through which individuals were compensated for their experiences at residential schools that they attended. Therefore, the list did not include schools that closed in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.</li>
				<li>The original list did not include the dates of operation for the schools. Due to limitations in the records, there are difficulties in determining opening and closing dates. Some schools, for example, might informally open when a missionary began boarding one or more students in his home. Continuity in the operation of schools could be interrupted. For example, schools that burned down might not reopen for several years. The precise date of closure might be difficult to pinpoint: the Blue Quills school, for example, is still in operation as a post-secondary educational facility.</li>
				<li>There were several anomalies in the list. The Methodist school at Red Deer, Alberta, which closed in 1919, and the Methodist school in Edmonton, which opened in 1924, are listed as one school. Similarly, the Anglican school at The Pas, Manitoba, which closed in 1933, and the Anglican school in Dauphin, Manitoba, which opened in 1957, are listed as one school (in part because both were known as the “McKay school”). There are separate listings for Roman Catholic schools at Fort Pelly and Kamsack, Saskatchewan, although these appear to refer to the same institution.<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref=2" epub:type="noteref">[2]</a></li>
				<li>It was not uncommon for schools to be known by a variety of names: one might relate to its geographic name, one might refer to a Christian saint, and another might refer to the region in which the school was located. The industrial school at Lebret, for example, was referred to as the “Lebret school,” the “Qu’Appelle school,” and the “St. Paul’s school”—all at the same time. It later became known as the “Whitecalf school.” There is also duplication in names: there were three St. Marys, four St. Pauls, and at least eight St. Josephs.</li>
				<li>The question of religious affiliation is not always straightforward. At first, most of the schools were quite clearly the initiatives of Catholic and Protestant missionary organizations. That affiliation formally ended in 1969. However, for a number of years after that, church-appointed principals remained in offices, and the religious denomination that had been previously associated with the school continued to provide pastoral care.</li>
				<li>All these issues combine to complicate any attempt to list the schools on the Settlement Agreement with their opening and closing dates, location, and religious affiliation.</li>
			</ul>
			<p>Appendix 2.1 presents the schools listed on the Settlement Agreement by province (in alphabetical order). Because of the number of schools with the same name, the schools are listed by location. (When more than one school was located in a single location, there are multiple entries for that location.) Appendix 2.1 also addresses the anomalies that appeared in the Settlement Agreement list: separate listings have been created for schools that were combined on the Settlement Agreement list, such as those at Edmonton and Red Deer. The Kamsack and Fort Pelly Roman Catholic schools have been combined, as have the Roman Catholic schools at Cross Lake, Norway House, Notre Dame, and Jack River, which appear to have been part of a linked administrative structure. Where possible, the opening and closing dates are based on archival documents. Where this was not possible, secondary sources were consulted. In most cases, the dates represent only the opening and closing, and do not reflect periods when the school might have been temporarily closed. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada attempted to be as comprehensive as possible. For this reason, the dates may not correspond to those used in assessing claims under the Common Experience Payment program and the Independent Assessment Process, which employ criteria relating to the degree of federal involvement in the operation of the facility.</p>
			<p>Appendix 2.2 lists residential schools that were funded by Indian Affairs in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but were not included in the Settlement Agreement. The information on these schools comes from the Indian Affairs annual reports, particularly the table of schools published annually.</p>
			<section class="residentialschoollist">
				<h3>Appendix 2.1.: Residential schools and residences included in the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement</h3>
				<h4>Alberta</h4>
				<h5>Assumption</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Our Lady Assumption, Assumption, Hay Lakes</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1951<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref=3" epub:type="noteref">[3]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref=4" epub:type="noteref">[4]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Brocket</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Sacred Heart, Brocket</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1887<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref=5" epub:type="noteref">[5]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1961<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref=6" epub:type="noteref">[6]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Brocket</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Cyprian’s, Queen Victoria’s Jubilee Home, Peigan</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref=7" epub:type="noteref">[7]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1961<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref=8" epub:type="noteref">[8]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Calais</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Sturgeon Lake, Calais, St. Francis Xavier</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1907<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref=9" epub:type="noteref">[9]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1961<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref=10" epub:type="noteref">[10]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Cardston</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Mary’s, Blood, Immaculate Conception</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1898<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref=11" epub:type="noteref">[11]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1988<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref=12" epub:type="noteref">[12]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Cardston</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Paul’s, Blood</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1891<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref=13" epub:type="noteref">[13]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref=14" epub:type="noteref">[14]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Cluny</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Crowfoot, St. Joseph’s, St. Trinité</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1900<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref=15" epub:type="noteref">[15]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1968<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref=16" epub:type="noteref">[16]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Desmarais–Wabasca</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Desmarais (Wabisca Lake, St. Martins, Wabisca Roman Catholic)</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1901<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref=17" epub:type="noteref">[17]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref=18" epub:type="noteref">[18]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Edmonton (St. Albert)</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Edmonton (Poundmaker)</li>
					<li>Methodist, later United Church of Canada</li>
					<li>Opening: 1924<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref=19" epub:type="noteref">[19]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1968<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref=20" epub:type="noteref">[20]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Chipewyan</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Holy Angels, Fort Chipewyan, École des Saints-Anges</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1874<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref=21" epub:type="noteref">[21]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1974<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref=22" epub:type="noteref">[22]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Vermilion</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort Vermilion, St. Henry’s</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1900<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref=23" epub:type="noteref">[23]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1968<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref=24" epub:type="noteref">[24]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Gleichen</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Old Sun (Old Sun’s)</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1886<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref=25" epub:type="noteref">[25]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1971<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref=26" epub:type="noteref">[26]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Grouard</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Bernard’s, Grouard, Lesser Slave Lake</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1886<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref=27" epub:type="noteref">[27]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1961<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref=28" epub:type="noteref">[28]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>High River</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Joseph’s, High River, Dunbow</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1884<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref=29" epub:type="noteref">[29]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1922<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref=30" epub:type="noteref">[30]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Hobbema</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Ermineskin</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1895<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref=31" epub:type="noteref">[31]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref=32" epub:type="noteref">[32]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Joussard</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Joussard, St. Bruno’s</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1913<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref=33" epub:type="noteref">[33]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref=34" epub:type="noteref">[34]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Lac La Biche</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lac La Biche, Notre Dame des Victoires</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1863<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref=35" epub:type="noteref">[35]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1898<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref=36" epub:type="noteref">[36]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Lesser Slave Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lesser Slave Lake, St. Peter’s</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1894<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref=37" epub:type="noteref">[37]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1932<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref=38" epub:type="noteref">[38]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Morley</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Morley, Stony</li>
					<li>Methodist, later United Church of Canada</li>
					<li>Opening: 1922<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref=39" epub:type="noteref">[39]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref=40" epub:type="noteref">[40]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Red Deer</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Red Deer</li>
					<li>Methodist</li>
					<li>Opening: 1893<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref=41" epub:type="noteref">[41]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1919<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref=42" epub:type="noteref">[42]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Saddle Lake (later St. Paul)</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Blue Quills, Saddle Lake, Sacred Heart</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1898<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref=43" epub:type="noteref">[43]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1990<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref=44" epub:type="noteref">[44]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>St. Albert</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Albert, Youville</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1863<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref=45" epub:type="noteref">[45]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1948<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref=46" epub:type="noteref">[46]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Smoky River</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Augustine, Smoky River</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1898<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref=47" epub:type="noteref">[47]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1908<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref=48" epub:type="noteref">[48]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>T’suu Tina</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Sarcee, St. Barnabas</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1892<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref=49" epub:type="noteref">[49]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1922<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref=50" epub:type="noteref">[50]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Wabasca</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Wabasca Anglican, St. John’s, John’s Mission Wapuskaw</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1894<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref=51" epub:type="noteref">[51]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1966<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref=52" epub:type="noteref">[52]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Whitefish Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Andrews, Whitefish Lake</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1903<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref=53" epub:type="noteref">[53]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1950<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref=54" epub:type="noteref">[54]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>British Columbia</h4>
				<h5>Ahousat</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Ahousat, Ahousaht</li>
					<li>Presbyterian, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1904<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref=55" epub:type="noteref">[55]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1940<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref=56" epub:type="noteref">[56]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Alert Bay</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Michael’s, Alert Bay Girls’ Home, Alert Bay Boys’ Home</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1894<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref=57" epub:type="noteref">[57]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1974<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref=58" epub:type="noteref">[58]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Anahim</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Anahim Lake</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1968<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref=59" epub:type="noteref">[59]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1977<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref=60" epub:type="noteref">[60]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Chilliwack/Sardis</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Coqualeetza</li>
					<li>Methodist, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1894<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref=61" epub:type="noteref">[61]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1940<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref=62" epub:type="noteref">[62]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Cranbrook</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Cranbrook, St. Eugene’s, Kootenay</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref=63" epub:type="noteref">[63]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1970<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref=64" epub:type="noteref">[64]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fraser Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lejac, Fraser Lake</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1922<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref=65" epub:type="noteref">[65]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1976<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref=66" epub:type="noteref">[66]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kamloops</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Kamloops</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref=67" epub:type="noteref">[67]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1978<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref=68" epub:type="noteref">[68]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kitamaat/Kitimaat</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Kitamaat (Elizabeth Long Memorial Home for Girls)</li>
					<li>Methodist, United Church after 1925</li>
					<li>Opening: 1905<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref=69" epub:type="noteref">[69]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1941<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref=70" epub:type="noteref">[70]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kuper Island</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Kuper Island</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref=71" epub:type="noteref">[71]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref=72" epub:type="noteref">[72]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Lower Post</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lower Post</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1951<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref=73" epub:type="noteref">[73]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref=74" epub:type="noteref">[74]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Lytton</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. George’s, Lytton</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1902<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref=75" epub:type="noteref">[75]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1979<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref=76" epub:type="noteref">[76]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Meares Island/Christie/Tofino</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Christie, Clayoquot, Kakawis</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1900<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref=77" epub:type="noteref">[77]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1983<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref=78" epub:type="noteref">[78]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Mission</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Mary’s, Mission</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1863<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref=79" epub:type="noteref">[79]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1984<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref=80" epub:type="noteref">[80]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>North Vancouver/Squamish</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Paul’s, Squamish, North Vancouver</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1899<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref=81" epub:type="noteref">[81]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1959<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref=82" epub:type="noteref">[82]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Port Alberni</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Alberni</li>
					<li>Presbyterian, United Church after 1925</li>
					<li>Opening: 1893<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref=83" epub:type="noteref">[83]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref=84" epub:type="noteref">[84]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Port Simpson/Fort Simpson</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Port Simpson, Crosby Home for Girls</li>
					<li>Methodist, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1879<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref=85" epub:type="noteref">[85]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1948<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref=86" epub:type="noteref">[86]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sechelt</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Sechelt</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1904<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref=87" epub:type="noteref">[87]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref=88" epub:type="noteref">[88]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Williams Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Cariboo, St. Joseph’s, Williams Lake</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1891<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref=89" epub:type="noteref">[89]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1981<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref=90" epub:type="noteref">[90]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Manitoba</h4>
				<h5>Birtle</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Birtle</li>
					<li>Presbyterian</li>
					<li>Opening: 1888<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref=91" epub:type="noteref">[91]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1970<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref=92" epub:type="noteref">[92]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Brandon</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Brandon</li>
					<li>Methodist, United Church after 1925 (1929?), Roman Catholic (1970–1972)</li>
					<li>Opening: 1895<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref=93" epub:type="noteref">[93]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1972<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref=94" epub:type="noteref">[94]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Churchill</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Churchill Vocational Centre</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1964<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref=95" epub:type="noteref">[95]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref=96" epub:type="noteref">[96]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Cross Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Cross Lake, St. Joseph’s, Norway House, Notre Dame Hostel, Jack River Hostel</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1912<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref=97" epub:type="noteref">[97]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref=98" epub:type="noteref">[98]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Dauphin</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>McKay</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1957<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref=99" epub:type="noteref">[99]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1988<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref=100" epub:type="noteref">[100]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Elkhorn</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Elkhorn, Washakada</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1889<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref=101" epub:type="noteref">[101]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1918<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref=102" epub:type="noteref">[102]</a></li>
					<li>Reopening: 1923<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref=103" epub:type="noteref">[103]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1949<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref=104" epub:type="noteref">[104]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Norway House</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Norway House</li>
					<li>Methodist, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1898<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref=105" epub:type="noteref">[105]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref=106" epub:type="noteref">[106]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Pine Creek</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Pine Creek, Camperville</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref=107" epub:type="noteref">[107]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref=108" epub:type="noteref">[108]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Pine Falls</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort Alexander</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1905<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref=109" epub:type="noteref">[109]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref=110" epub:type="noteref">[110]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Portage la Prairie</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Portage la Prairie</li>
					<li>Presbyterian, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1891<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref=111" epub:type="noteref">[111]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref=112" epub:type="noteref">[112]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sandy Bay</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Sandy Bay</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1905<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref=113" epub:type="noteref">[113]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1970<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref=114" epub:type="noteref">[114]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>The Pas</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>McKay</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1915<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref=115" epub:type="noteref">[115]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1933<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref=116" epub:type="noteref">[116]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>The Pas/Clearwater Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Clearwater, Guy Hill, Clearwater Lake</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1952<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref=117" epub:type="noteref">[117]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1979<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref=118" epub:type="noteref">[118]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Winnipeg</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Assiniboia</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1958<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref=119" epub:type="noteref">[119]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref=120" epub:type="noteref">[120]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Northwest Territories</h4>
				<h5>Aklavik</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Aklavik, Immaculate Conception</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1926<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref=121" epub:type="noteref">[121]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1959<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref=122" epub:type="noteref">[122]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Aklavik</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Aklavik, All Saints</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1936<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref=123" epub:type="noteref">[123]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1959<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref=124" epub:type="noteref">[124]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Franklin</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort Franklin Hostel</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1967<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref=125" epub:type="noteref">[125]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1972<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref=126" epub:type="noteref">[126]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort McPherson</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fleming Hall</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1958<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref=127" epub:type="noteref">[127]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1976<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref=128" epub:type="noteref">[128]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Providence</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort Providence Boarding Home (Sacred Heart)</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1867<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref=129" epub:type="noteref">[129]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref=130" epub:type="noteref">[130]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Resolution</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort Resolution Residence (St. Joseph’s)</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1903<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref=131" epub:type="noteref">[131]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1957<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref=132" epub:type="noteref">[132]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Simpson</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Bompas Hall</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref=133" epub:type="noteref">[133]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref=134" epub:type="noteref">[134]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Simpson</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lapointe Hall</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-135" id="noteref=135" epub:type="noteref">[135]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-136" id="noteref=136" epub:type="noteref">[136]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Simpson</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lapointe Hall, Deh Cho Hall</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic/Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1974<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-137" id="noteref=137" epub:type="noteref">[137]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1986<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref=138" epub:type="noteref">[138]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Smith</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Breynat Hall</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1958<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref=139" epub:type="noteref">[139]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref=140" epub:type="noteref">[140]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Smith</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Grandin College</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1964<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref=141" epub:type="noteref">[141]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1985<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref=142" epub:type="noteref">[142]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Hay River</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Peter’s</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1895<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref=143" epub:type="noteref">[143]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1937<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref=144" epub:type="noteref">[144]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Inuvik</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Grollier Hall</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1959<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref=145" epub:type="noteref">[145]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1997<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref=146" epub:type="noteref">[146]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Inuvik</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Stringer Hall</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1959<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref=147" epub:type="noteref">[147]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref=148" epub:type="noteref">[148]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Yellowknife</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Akaitcho Hall</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1958<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref=149" epub:type="noteref">[149]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1994<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref=150" epub:type="noteref">[150]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Nova Scotia</h4>
				<h5>Shubenacadie</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Shubenacadie, St. Anne’s</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1930<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref=151" epub:type="noteref">[151]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1967<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref=152" epub:type="noteref">[152]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Nunavut</h4>
				<h5>Arviat</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Eskimo Point/Arviat Arviat (Eskimo Point)</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref=153" epub:type="noteref">[153]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1967<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref=154" epub:type="noteref">[154]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Cambridge Bay</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Cambridge Bay</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1964<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref=155" epub:type="noteref">[155]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1996<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref=156" epub:type="noteref">[156]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Chesterfield Inlet</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Chesterfield Inlet, Turquetil Hall</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1955<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref=157" epub:type="noteref">[157]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref=158" epub:type="noteref">[158]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Coppermine</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Coppermine Tent Hostel Coppermine</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1955<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref=159" epub:type="noteref">[159]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1959<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref=160" epub:type="noteref">[160]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Igloolik/Iglulik</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Igloolik/Iglulik</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref=161" epub:type="noteref">[161]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref=162" epub:type="noteref">[162]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Iqaluit</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Frobisher Bay (Ukkivik) Frobisher Bay</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1971<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref=163" epub:type="noteref">[163]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1997<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref=164" epub:type="noteref">[164]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kimmirut</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Lake Harbour</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1964<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref=165" epub:type="noteref">[165]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1968<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref=166" epub:type="noteref">[166]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kinngait</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Cape Dorset/Kinngait Cape Dorset</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref=167" epub:type="noteref">[167]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1965<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref=168" epub:type="noteref">[168]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Mittimatalik</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Pond Inlet/Mittimatalik</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref=169" epub:type="noteref">[169]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1970<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref=170" epub:type="noteref">[170]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Pangnirtung/Panniqtuuq</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Pangnirtung (Pangnirtang)</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1964<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref=171" epub:type="noteref">[171]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1967<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref=172" epub:type="noteref">[172]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Qamani’tuaq/Qamanittuaq</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Baker Lake/Qamani’tuaq Baker Lake</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1961<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref=173" epub:type="noteref">[173]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1967<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref=174" epub:type="noteref">[174]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Qikiqtarjuaq</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Broughton Island/Qikiqtarjuaq Broughton Island</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref=175" epub:type="noteref">[175]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1966<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref=176" epub:type="noteref">[176]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sanikiluaq</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Belcher Islands Belcher Islands</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1963<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref=177" epub:type="noteref">[177]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1964<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref=178" epub:type="noteref">[178]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Ontario</h4>
				<h5>Brantford</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Mohawk Institute</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1832<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref=179" epub:type="noteref">[179]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1970<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref=180" epub:type="noteref">[180]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Chapleau</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Chapleau, St. John’s</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1907<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref=181" epub:type="noteref">[181]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1948<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref=182" epub:type="noteref">[182]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Cristal Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Cristal Lake</li>
					<li>Northern Light Gospel Mission</li>
					<li>Opening: 1976<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref=183" epub:type="noteref">[183]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1986<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref=184" epub:type="noteref">[184]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Albany</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Anne’s, Fort Albany</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1902<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref=185" epub:type="noteref">[185]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1976<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref=186" epub:type="noteref">[186]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort Frances</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort Frances, St. Margaret’s</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1905<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref=187" epub:type="noteref">[187]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1974<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref=188" epub:type="noteref">[188]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort William</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort William, St. Joseph’s</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1870<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref=189" epub:type="noteref">[189]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1968<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref=190" epub:type="noteref">[190]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kenora</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Mary’s, Kenora</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1897<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref=191" epub:type="noteref">[191]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1972<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-192" id="noteref=192" epub:type="noteref">[192]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kenora/Shoal Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Cecilia Jeffrey, Kenora, Shoal Lake</li>
					<li>Presbyterian, United Church briefly, Presbyterian</li>
					<li>Opening: 1902<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-193" id="noteref=193" epub:type="noteref">[193]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1976<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-194" id="noteref=194" epub:type="noteref">[194]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>McIntosh</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>McIntosh</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1925<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref=195" epub:type="noteref">[195]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref=196" epub:type="noteref">[196]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Moose Factory Island</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Bishop Horden Hall, Moose Fort, Moose Factory</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1855<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref=197" epub:type="noteref">[197]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1976<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref=198" epub:type="noteref">[198]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Muncey (Munceytown)</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Mount Elgin, Muncey, St. Thomas</li>
					<li>Methodist, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1851<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref=199" epub:type="noteref">[199]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1946<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref=200" epub:type="noteref">[200]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Poplar Hill</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Poplar Hill Development School</li>
					<li>Northern Light Gospel Mission</li>
					<li>Opening: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref=201" epub:type="noteref">[201]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1989<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref=202" epub:type="noteref">[202]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sault Ste. Marie</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Shingwauk Home</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1873<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref=203" epub:type="noteref">[203]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1970<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref=204" epub:type="noteref">[204]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sault Ste. Marie</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Wawanosh Home</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1879<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref=205" epub:type="noteref">[205]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1894<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref=206" epub:type="noteref">[206]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sioux Lookout</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Pelican Lake, Pelican Falls</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1926<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref=207" epub:type="noteref">[207]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1978<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref=208" epub:type="noteref">[208]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Spanish</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Spanish Boys’ School, Charles Garnier, St. Joseph’s</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1913<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref=209" epub:type="noteref">[209]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1958<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref=210" epub:type="noteref">[210]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Spanish</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Spanish Girls’ School, St. Joseph’s, St. Peter’s, St. Anne’s</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1913<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref=211" epub:type="noteref">[211]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref=212" epub:type="noteref">[212]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Stirland Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Stirland Lake, Wahbon Bay Academy Northern Light Gospel Mission</li>
					<li>Opening: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref=213" epub:type="noteref">[213]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1991<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref=214" epub:type="noteref">[214]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Québec</h4>
				<h5>Amos</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Amos, Amos Student Residence, St-Marc Residence, St-Marc-de-Figuery</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1955<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref=215" epub:type="noteref">[215]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1973<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref=216" epub:type="noteref">[216]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort George</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort George, St. Phillip’s</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1932<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref=217" epub:type="noteref">[217]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref=218" epub:type="noteref">[218]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort George</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort George, St. Joseph’s Mission, Residence Couture, Sainte-Thérèse-de-l’Enfant-Jésus</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1931<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref=219" epub:type="noteref">[219]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1978<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref=220" epub:type="noteref">[220]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Fort George</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort George Hostels</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1975<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref=221" epub:type="noteref">[221]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1978<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref=222" epub:type="noteref">[222]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Inukjuak</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Port Harrison, Inoucdjouac, Inoucdouac</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref=223" epub:type="noteref">[223]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1971<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref=224" epub:type="noteref">[224]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kangirsualujjuaq/Fort George</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at George River</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref=225" epub:type="noteref">[225]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref=226" epub:type="noteref">[226]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kangirsuk</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Payne Bay, Bellin</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref=227" epub:type="noteref">[227]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1962<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref=228" epub:type="noteref">[228]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kuujjuaraapik/Whapmagoostui</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Federal Hostel at Great Whale River, Poste-de-laBaleine, Kuujjuaraapik</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref=229" epub:type="noteref">[229]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1970<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref=230" epub:type="noteref">[230]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>La Tuque</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>La Tuque</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1963<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref=231" epub:type="noteref">[231]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1978<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref=232" epub:type="noteref">[232]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Mistassini</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Mistassini Hostels</li>
					<li>Non-denominational</li>
					<li>Opening: 1971<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref=233" epub:type="noteref">[233]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1978<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref=234" epub:type="noteref">[234]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Pointe Bleue</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Pointe Bleue</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref=235" epub:type="noteref">[235]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1991<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref=236" epub:type="noteref">[236]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sept-Îles</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Sept-Îles, Seven Islands, Notre Dame, Maliotenam</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1952<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref=237" epub:type="noteref">[237]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1971<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref=238" epub:type="noteref">[238]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Saskatchewan</h4>
				<h5>Balcarres</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>File Hills</li>
					<li>Presbyterian, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1889<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref=239" epub:type="noteref">[239]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1949<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref=240" epub:type="noteref">[240]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Battleford</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Battleford</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1883<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref=241" epub:type="noteref">[241]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1914<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref=242" epub:type="noteref">[242]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Beauval</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Beauval, Lac la Plonge, Île-à-la-Crosse</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1860<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref=243" epub:type="noteref">[243]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1995<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref=244" epub:type="noteref">[244]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Delmas</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Thunderchild, Delmas, St. Henri</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1901<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref=245" epub:type="noteref">[245]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1948<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref=246" epub:type="noteref">[246]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Duck Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Michael’s, Duck Lake</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1894<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref=247" epub:type="noteref">[247]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1996<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref=248" epub:type="noteref">[248]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Gordon’s Reserve, Punnichy</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Gordon’s, Punnichy</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1888<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref=249" epub:type="noteref">[249]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1996<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref=250" epub:type="noteref">[250]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Grayson</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Marieval, Cowessess, Crooked Lake</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1898<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref=251" epub:type="noteref">[251]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1997<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref=252" epub:type="noteref">[252]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kamsack</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Cote Improved Federal Day School</li>
					<li>United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1928<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref=253" epub:type="noteref">[253]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1940<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref=254" epub:type="noteref">[254]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kamsack</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Crowstand</li>
					<li>Presbyterian</li>
					<li>Opening: 1889<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref=255" epub:type="noteref">[255]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1915<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref=256" epub:type="noteref">[256]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Kamsack/Fort Pelly</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Kamsack, St. Phillips</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1928<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref=257" epub:type="noteref">[257]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref=258" epub:type="noteref">[258]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Lac La Ronge</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>All Saints School, Lac La Ronge</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1906<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref=259" epub:type="noteref">[259]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1947<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref=260" epub:type="noteref">[260]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Lebret/Qu’Appelle</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lebret, Qu’Appelle, St. Paul’s, Whitecalf</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1884<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref=261" epub:type="noteref">[261]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1998<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref=262" epub:type="noteref">[262]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Muscowequan</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Lestock, Muscowequan, Muskowekwan, Touchwood</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1889<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-263" id="noteref=263" epub:type="noteref">[263]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1997<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-264" id="noteref=264" epub:type="noteref">[264]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Onion Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Barnabas, Onion Lake</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1893<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-265" id="noteref=265" epub:type="noteref">[265]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1943<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-266" id="noteref=266" epub:type="noteref">[266]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Onion Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Anthony’s, Onion Lake, Sacred Heart</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1892<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-267" id="noteref=267" epub:type="noteref">[267]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1974<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-268" id="noteref=268" epub:type="noteref">[268]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Prince Albert</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Prince Albert, St. Alban’s, All Saints, St. Barnabas, Lac La Ronge</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1951<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-269" id="noteref=269" epub:type="noteref">[269]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1997<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref=270" epub:type="noteref">[270]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Prince Albert</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Saint Alban’s</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1944<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref=271" epub:type="noteref">[271]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1951<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-272" id="noteref=272" epub:type="noteref">[272]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Regina</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Regina</li>
					<li>Presbyterian</li>
					<li>Opening: 1891<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-273" id="noteref=273" epub:type="noteref">[273]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1910<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-274" id="noteref=274" epub:type="noteref">[274]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Round Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Round Lake</li>
					<li>Presbyterian, later United Church</li>
					<li>Opening: 1884<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-275" id="noteref=275" epub:type="noteref">[275]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1950<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-276" id="noteref=276" epub:type="noteref">[276]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Sturgeon Landing</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Sturgeon Landing</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1927<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-277" id="noteref=277" epub:type="noteref">[277]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1952<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-278" id="noteref=278" epub:type="noteref">[278]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Yukon</h4>
				<h5>Carcross</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Carcross IRS (Chooulta)</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1903<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref=279" epub:type="noteref">[279]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1969<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref=280" epub:type="noteref">[280]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Dawson City</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Paul’s Hostel</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1920<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-281" id="noteref=281" epub:type="noteref">[281]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1953<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-282" id="noteref=282" epub:type="noteref">[282]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Shingle Point</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Shingle Point</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1929<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-283" id="noteref=283" epub:type="noteref">[283]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1936<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-284" id="noteref=284" epub:type="noteref">[284]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Whitehorse</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Coudert Hall</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-285" id="noteref=285" epub:type="noteref">[285]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1971<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-286" id="noteref=286" epub:type="noteref">[286]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Whitehorse</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Whitehorse Baptist Mission (Baptist Indian School)</li>
					<li>Baptist</li>
					<li>Opening: 1947<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-287" id="noteref=287" epub:type="noteref">[287]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1959<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-288" id="noteref=288" epub:type="noteref">[288]</a></li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Whitehorse</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Yukon Hall</li>
					<li>Non-denominational/Protestant</li>
					<li>Opening: 1960<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-289" id="noteref=289" epub:type="noteref">[289]</a></li>
					<li>Closing: 1985<a href="endnotes_7_appendix2.xhtml#note-290" id="noteref=290" epub:type="noteref">[290]</a></li>
				</ul>
			</section>
			<section class="residentialschoollist">
				<h3>Appendix 2.2: Residential schools identified in Indian Affairs annual reports that were not included in the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement.</h3>
				<h4>Alberta</h4>
				<h5>Calgary</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Dunstan</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1896</li>
					<li>Closing: 1907</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Morley</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>McDougall Orphanage</li>
					<li>Methodist</li>
					<li>Opening: 1886</li>
					<li>Closing: 1908</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Stony Plains</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Stony Plains</li>
					<li>Presbyterian</li>
					<li>Opening: 1892</li>
					<li>Closing: 1894</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Vermilion Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Irene Training Institute at Vermilion Lake</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1885</li>
					<li>Closing: 1894</li>
				</ul>
				<h4>British Columbia</h4>
				<h5>Fort St. James</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort St. James (Stuart Lake)</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1917</li>
					<li>Closing: 1922</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Metlakatla</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Metlakatla</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1872</li>
					<li>Closing: 1908</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Yale</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>All Hallows School</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1884</li>
					<li>Closing: 1918</li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Manitoba</h4>
				<h5>Middlechurch</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Paul’s, Middlechurch (Rupert’s Land)</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890</li>
					<li>Closing: 1906</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>St. Boniface</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>St. Boniface</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890</li>
					<li>Closing: 1905</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Water Hen</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Water Hen</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1890</li>
					<li>Closing: 1900</li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Ontario</h4>
				<h5>Wikwemikong</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Wikwemikong (Manitoulin Island)</li>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1868</li>
					<li>Closing: 1911</li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Saskatchewan</h4>
				<h5>Muscowpetung</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Muscowpetung Agency Boarding School</li>
					<li>Presbyterian</li>
					<li>Opening: 1888</li>
					<li>Closing: 1894</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Muskeg Lake</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Roman Catholic</li>
					<li>Opening: 1892</li>
					<li>Closing: 1892</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Prince Albert</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Emmanuel College</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1879</li>
					<li>Closing: 1909</li>
				</ul>
				<h5>Standing Buffalo</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Standing Buffalo</li>
					<li>Presbyterian</li>
					<li>Opening: 1889</li>
					<li>Closing: 1893</li>
				</ul>
				<h4>Northwest Territories</h4>
				<h5>Fort Resolution</h5>
				<ul>
					<li>Fort Resolution</li>
					<li>Anglican</li>
					<li>Opening: 1891</li>
					<li>Closing: 1892</li>
				</ul>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
