<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="appendix5" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2>Appendix 5: Honorary Witnesses</h2>
			<p>One of the goals set out in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s mandate was to “witness, support, promote and facilitate truth and reconciliation events at both the national and community levels.” Witnessing in this context refers to the traditional and continuing Aboriginal practice of calling forth witnesses to validate moments of great historic significance. Their role is to recall, remember, and care for the history witnessed and experienced, to share it more widely once they are back home, and to carry the knowledge of it with others into the future. In its work, the Commission has called upon a number of prominent Canadian and international individuals, as well as a number of institutions, to serve as <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr> Honorary Witnesses. It is in this spirit that those named in the list below have accepted the sacred trust of bearing witness to the truths of residential school Survivors, and of contributing to the goal of ongoing reconciliation between the Indigenous and Non-Indigenous peoples of Canada, beginning with sharing what they have heard and learned.</p>
			<h3>Individuals</h3>
			<p>
				<ul>
					<li>Dr. Evan Adams</li>
					<li>Her Excellency Madame Justice Louise Arbour</li>
					<li>Dr. Cindy Blackstock</li>
					<li>Joseph Boyden</li>
					<li>Charles-Mathieu Brunelle</li>
					<li>Éloge Butera</li>
					<li>Francisco Cali Tzay</li>
					<li>The Right Honourable Joe Clark</li>
					<li>His Honour Charles Cunliffe Barnett</li>
					<li>Renée Dupuis</li>
					<li>His Worship Bill Elliot</li>
					<li>Grand Chief Phil Fontaine</li>
					<li>Dr. Sheila Fraser (honoris causa)</li>
					<li>Patsy George</li>
					<li>Jim Gladstone</li>
					<li>The Honourable Judith Guichon</li>
					<li>Barbara Hall</li>
					<li>Clara Hughes</li>
					<li>The Honourable Justice Frank Iacobucci</li>
					<li>His Worship Don Iveson</li>
					<li>Her Excellency the Right Honourable Michaëlle Jean</li>
					<li>Grand Chief Edward John</li>
					<li>His Excellency David Johnston</li>
					<li>Her Excellency Sharon Johnston</li>
					<li>Chief Dr. Robert Joseph (honoris causa)</li>
					<li>Joé Juneau</li>
					<li>Tina Keeper</li>
					<li>Marc Kielburger</li>
					<li>Wab Kinew</li>
					<li>David Langtry</li>
					<li>The Honourable Philip S. Lee</li>
					<li>Dr. Stephen Lewis (honoris causa)</li>
					<li>The Right Honourable Paul Martin</li>
					<li>Sir Sidney Mead</li>
					<li>Jane Middleton-Moz</li>
					<li>Nick Noorani</li>
					<li>Dr. Alanis Obomsawin (honoris causa)</li>
					<li>The Honourable David C. Onley</li>
					<li>Dr. Daniel Pauly</li>
					<li>Gwendolyn Point</li>
					<li>The Honourable Stephen Point</li>
					<li>His Worship Gregor Robertson</li>
					<li>Dr. Shelagh Rogers (honoris causa)</li>
					<li>Dr. Buffy Sainte-Marie (honoris causa)</li>
					<li>Jonathan Sas</li>
					<li>His Worship James V. “Jim” Scarrow</li>
					<li>The Honourable Andy Scott</li>
					<li>Dr. Mary Simon</li>
					<li>Sylvia Smith</li>
					<li>Her Honour Corrine E. Sparks</li>
					<li>The Honourable Chuck Strahl</li>
					<li>Naty Atz Sunuc</li>
					<li>Imam Michael Abdur Rashid Taylor</li>
					<li>David Tuccaro</li>
					<li>Robert Waisman</li>
					<li>Dr. Andrea Walsh</li>
					<li>Dr. Cynthia Wesley-Esquimaux</li>
					<li>Charlotte Wolfrey</li>
					<li>David Wong</li>
					<li>Victor Wong</li>
				</ul>
			</p>
			<h3>Organizations</h3>
			<p>
				<ul>
					<li>Association des Femmes Autochtones du Québec—Quebec Native Women’s Association (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">AFAQ-QNWA</abbr>)</li>
					<li>Canadians for a New Partnership (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">CFNP</abbr>)</li>
					<li>Connecting Home Ltd., Australia</li>
					<li>International Center for Transitional Justice (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">ICTJ</abbr>)</li>
					<li>Maine Wabanaki State Child Welfare Truth and Reconciliation Commission</li>
				</ul>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
