<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Bibliography</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="bibliography" epub:type="bibliography">
			<h2>Bibliography</h2>
			<h3>Primary Sources</h3>
			<h4>1. Truth and Reconciliation Commission Databases</h4>
			<p>The endnotes of this report often commence with the abbreviation <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr>, followed by one of the following abbreviations: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">ASAGR</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">AVS</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">CAR</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSSA</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">NRA</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">RBS</abbr>, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">LAC</abbr>. The documents so cited are located in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s database. At the end of each of these endnotes, in square brackets, is the document identification number for each of these documents. The following is a brief description of each database.</p>
			<!--consider a definition list for the following-->
			
			<dl>
			<dt>Active and Semi-Active Government Records (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">ASAGR</abbr>) Database</dt>
				<dd>The Active and Semi-Active Government Records database contains active and semi-active records collected from federal governmental departments that potentially intersected with the administration and management of the residential school system. Documents that were relevant to the history and/or legacy of the system were disclosed to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr>) in keeping with the federal government’s obligations in relation to the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSSA</abbr>). Some of the other federal government departments included, but were not limited to, the Department of Justice, Health Canada, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and National Defence. Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada undertook the responsibility of centrally collecting and producing the records from these other federal departments to the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr>.</dd>

			<dt>Audio/Video Statement (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">AVS</abbr>) Database</dt>
				<dd>The Audio/Video Statement database contains video and audio statements provided to the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr> at community hearings and regional and national events held by the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr>, as well as at other special events attended by the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr>.</dd>
			
			<dt>Church Archival Records (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">CAR</abbr>) Database</dt>
				<dd>The Church Archival Records database contains records collected from the different church/religious entities that were involved in administration and management of residential schools. The church/religious entities primarily included, but were not limited to, entities associated with the Roman Catholic Church, the Anglican Church of Canada, the Presbyterian Church in Canada, and the United Church of Canada. The records were collected as part of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr>’s mandate, as set out in the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement, to “identify sources and create as complete an historical record as possible of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRS</abbr> system and legacy.”</dd>
			
			<dt>Indian Residential Schools School Authority (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSSA</abbr>) Database</dt>
				<dd>The Indian Residential Schools School Authority database is comprised of individual records related to each residential school, as set out by the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSSA</abbr>.</dd>
			
			<dt>National Research and Analysis (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">NRA</abbr>) Database</dt>
				<dd>The National Research and Analysis database contains records collected by the National Research and Analysis Directorate, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, formerly Indian Residential Schools Resolution Canada (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSRC</abbr>). The records in the database were originally collected for the purpose of research into a variety of allegations, such as abuse in residential schools, and primarily resulted from court processes such as civil and criminal litigation, and later the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">IRSSA</abbr>), as well as from out-of-court processes such as Alternative Dispute Resolution. A majority of the records were collected from Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. The collection also contains records from other federal departments and religious entities. In the case of some records in the database that were provided by outside entities, the information in the database is incomplete. In those instances, the endnotes in the report reads, “No document location, no document file source.”</dd>
			
			<dt>Red, Black and School Series (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">RBS</abbr>) Database</dt>
				<dd>The Red, Black and School Series database contains records provided by Library and Archives Canada to the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr>. These three sub-series contain records that were originally part of the “Headquarters Central Registry System,” or records management system, for departments that preceded the current federal department of Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. The archival records are currently related to the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development fonds and are held as part of Library and Archives Canada’s collection.</dd>
			
			<dt>Library and Archives Canada (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">LACAR</abbr>) Archival Records Container and Document Databases</dt>
				<dd>The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">LAC</abbr> Records Container (and Document databases contain records collected from Library and Archives Canada (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">LAC</abbr>). The archival records of federal governmental departments that potentially intersected with the administration and management of Indian Residential Schools were held as part of Library and Archives Canada’s collection. Documents that were relevant to the history and/or legacy of the Indian Residential School system were initially collected by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, in conjunction with Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, as part of their mandate, as set out in the Indian Residential School Settlement Agreement. The collection of records was later continued by Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, based on federal government’s obligation to disclose documents in relation to the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement.</dd>
		</dl>

			<h4>2. Indian Affairs Annual Reports, 1864–1997</h4>
			<p>Within this report, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs</em> denotes the published annual reports created by the Government of Canada, and relating to Indian Affairs over the period from 1864 to 1997.</p>
			<p>The Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development was created in 1966. In 2011, it was renamed Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development. Before 1966, different departments were responsible for the portfolios of Indian Affairs and Northern Affairs.</p>
			<p>The departments responsible for Indian Affairs were (in chronological order):</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>The Department of the Secretary of State of Canada (to 1869)</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Department of the Secretary of State for the Provinces (1869–1873)</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Department of the Interior (1873–1880)</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Department of Indian Affairs (1880–1936)</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Department of Mines and Resources (1936–1950)</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Department of Citizenship and Immigration (1950–1965)</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Department of Northern Affairs and National Resources (1966)</p>
				</li>
				<li><p>The Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development (1966 to the present)</p></li>
			</ul>

			<p>The exact titles of Indian Affairs annual reports changed over time, and were named for the department.</p>

			<h4>3. Library and Archives Canada</h4>
			<dl>
			<dt>RG10 (Indian Affairs Records Group)</dt>
				<dd>The records of RG10 at Library and Archives Canada are currently part of the R216, Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development fonds. For clarity and brevity, in footnotes throughout this report, records belonging to the RG10 Records Group have been identified simply with their RG10 information. Where a copy of an RG10 document held in a <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr> database was used, the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">TRC</abbr> database holding that copy is clearly identified, along with the RG10 information connected with the original document.</dd>
			</dl>
			
			<h4>4. Other Archives</h4>
			<p>Provincial Archives of British Columbia. United Church of Canada Archives.</p>
			
			<h4>5. Government Publications</h4>
			
			<ul class="bibliolist">
				<li>Audette, L. A. <i class="citetitle">Report on The Commission, under Part II of the Inquiries Act, to investigate and report the circumstances in connection with the alleged flogging of Indian pupils recently at Shubenacadie, in The Province of Nova Scotia</i>, <i class="citetitle">17 September 1934</i>.</li>
				<li>Australia. Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. “Closing the Gap – The Prime Minister’s Report 2015.” <a href="http://www.dpmc.gov.au/pmc-indigenous-affairs/publication/closing-gap-prime-ministers-report-2015" >http://www.dpmc.gov.au/pmc-indigenous-affairs/publication/closing-gap-prime-ministers-report-2015</a>.</li>
				<li>Berger, Thomas R. <i class="citetitle">Northern Frontier, Northern Homeland: The Report of the Mackenzie Valley Pipeline Inquiry, Volume 1</i>. Ottawa: Supply and Services Canada, 1977.</li>
				<li>Brennan, Shannon. “Violent victimization of Aboriginal women in the Canadian provinces, 2009.” <i class="citetitle">Juristat</i>, 17 May 2011. Catalogue no. 85-002-x. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2011. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11439-eng.pdf" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11439-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>British Columbia. Ministry of Justice, Corrections Branch, Aboriginal Programs and Relationships. <i class="citetitle">Inclusivity: Strategic Plan 2012–2016</i>. <a href="http://www.pssg.gov.bc.ca/corrections/docs/AboriginalStratPlan.pdf" >http://www.pssg.gov.bc.ca/corrections/docs/AboriginalStratPlan.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>British Columbia. Office of the Provincial Health Officer. “Health, Crime and Doing Time: Potential Impacts of the <i class="citetitle">Safe Streets and Communities Act (Former Bill C-10)</i> on the Health and Well-Being of Aboriginal People in B.C.” Vancouver: Office of the Provincial Health Officer, 2013. <a href="http://www.health.gov.bc.ca/pho/pdf/health-crime-2013.pdf" >http://www.health.gov.bc.ca/pho/pdf/health-crime-2013.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Bryce, P. H. <i class="citetitle">Report on the Indian Schools of Manitoba and the North-West Territories</i>. Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1907.</li>
				<li>Brzozowski, Jodi-Anne, Andrea Taylor-Butts, and Sara Johnson. “Victimization and offending among the Aboriginal population in Canada.” <i class="citetitle">Juristat</i> 26, no. 3 (2006). Catalogue no. 85-002-XIE. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2006. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x2006003-eng.pdf" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x2006003-eng.pdf</a></li>
				<li>Canada. Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. “Canada’s Endorsement of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374807748/1309374897928" >http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374807748/1309374897928</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. “Commemoration 2011–2012 – Project Descriptions.” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974213551/1370974338097" >http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974213551/1370974338097</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. “Commemoration 2012–2013 – Project Descriptions.” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974253896/1370974471675" >http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974253896/1370974471675</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. “Remembering the Past: A Window to the Future.” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1332859355145/1332859433503" >http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1332859355145/1332859433503</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development. “Canada’s Statement of Support on the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.” 12 November 2010. http:// <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374239861/1309374546142" >www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374239861/1309374546142</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development. “Jordan’s Principle.” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1334329827982/1334329861879" >http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1334329827982/1334329861879</a>. (accessed 3 January 2014).</li>
				<li>Canada. Auditor General of Canada. <i class="citetitle">2011 Status Report of the Office of the Auditor General of Canada to the House of Commons. Chapter Four: Programs for First Nations on Reserves</i>. Ottawa: Office of the Auditor General of Canada, 2011. <a href="http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_oag_201106_04_e.pdf" >http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_oag_201106_04_e.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Canadian Human Rights Commission. <i class="citetitle">Report on Equality Rights of Aboriginal People</i>. Ottawa: Government of Canada, 2013.</li>
				<li>Canada. Department of Canadian Heritage. <i class="citetitle">2012–2013 Report on Plans and Priorities.</i> Ottawa: Canadian Heritage, 2012.</li>
				<li>Canada. Department of Justice. Youth Justice Research, <i class="citetitle">A One-Day Snapshot of Aboriginal Youth in Custody Across Canada: Phase II.</i> Ottawa: Department of Justice, February 2004. <a href="http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/cj-jp/yj-jj/yj2-jj2/yj2.pdf" >http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/cj-jp/yj-jj/yj2-jj2/yj2.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Governor General David Johnson. Speech delivered at the Symposium in Honour of the Royal Proclamation of 1763. Gatineau, Quebec. 7 October 2013. <a href="http://www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=15345&amp;lan=eng">http://www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=15345&amp;lan=eng</a> (accessed 5 December 2014).</li>
				<li>Canada. Indian Residential Schools Adjudication Secretariat. “Adjudication Secretariat Statistics, from September 19, 2007 to January 31, 2015.” <a href="http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php" >http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php</a> (accessed 20 February 2015).</li>
				<li>Canada. Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement. Schedule N. <a href="http://www.residential-schoolsettlement.ca/settlement.html" >http://www.residential-schoolsettlement.ca/settlement.html</a> (accessed 5 March 2015).</li>
				<li>Canada. Law Commission of Canada. <i class="citetitle">Restoring Dignity: Responding to Child Abuse in Canadian Institutions.</i> Ottawa: Public Works and Government Services Canada, 2000.</li>
				<li>Canada. Library and Archives Canada. “Aboriginal Heritage.” <a href="http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/dis-cover/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/introduction.aspx#d" >http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/dis-cover/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/introduction.aspx#d</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Library and Archives Canada. “Collection Development Framework.” 30 March 2005. <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/003024/f2/003024-e.pdf" >http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/003024/f2/003024-e.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Library and Archives Canada. “Conducting Research on Residential Schools: A Guide to the Records of the Indian and Inuit Affairs Program and Related Resources at Library and Archives Canada.” <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/020008/f2/020008-2000-e.pdf" >http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/020008/f2/020008-2000-e.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Library and Archives Canada. “Native Residential Schools: A Selective Bibliography.” <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/native-residential/index-e.html" >http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/native-residential/index-e.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Library and Archives Canada. “The Legacy of the Residential School System in Canada: A Selective Bibliography.” August 2009. <a href="http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/archives/archives-en/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/residential-schools-bibliography-2009.aspx" >http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/archives/archives-en/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/residential-schools-bibliography-2009.aspx</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Library and Archives Canada. Media release. “New Exhibition Reflecting the Uniqueness of the Inuit Experience of Residential Schools Launched at Library and Archives Canada.” 4 March 2009. <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/013/013-380-e.html" >http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/013/013-380-e.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Canada. <i class="citetitle">Discover Canada: The Rights and Re- sponsibilities of Citizenship</i>. 2012. <a href="http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/discover/index.asp" >http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/discover/index.asp</a> (accessed 26 March 2015).</li>
				<li>Canada. Parks Canada. “Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada.” <a href="http://www.pc.gc.ca/clmhc-hsmbc/comm-board/Transparence-Transparency.aspx" >http://www.pc.gc.ca/clmhc-hsmbc/comm-board/Transparence-Transparency.aspx</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Parliament. <i class="citetitle">House of Commons Debates</i>, 2 November 2006 (Bev Oda, Minister of Canadian Heritage and Status of Women). <a href="http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;Parl=39&amp;Ses=1&amp;DocId=2463069" >http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;Parl=39&amp;Ses=1&amp;DocId=2463069</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Parliament. House of Commons. Standing Committee on Canadian Heritage. 41st Parlia- ment, 1st Session, 5 June 2013. <a href="http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?DocId=6209352&amp;Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;Parl=41&amp;Ses=1" >http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?DocId=6209352&amp;Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;Parl=41&amp;Ses=1</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Parliament. Senate. <i class="citetitle">Debates</i>, 11 June 2009. <a href="http://www.parl.gc.ca/Content/Sen/Chamber/402/Debates/045db_2009-06-11-e.htm#3" >http://www.parl.gc.ca/Content/Sen/Chamber/402/Debates/045db_2009-06-11-e.htm#3</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Parliament. Senate. Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples. <i class="citetitle">Reforming First Nations Education: From Crisis to Hope</i>. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer, 2011.</li>
				<li>Canada. Parliament. Senate. Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs. <i class="citetitle">Language Rights in Canada’s North: Nunavut’s New Official Languages Act: Final Report</i>. Ottawa: Senate Committees Directorate, June 2009.</li>
				<li>Canada. Parliament. Special Joint Committee of the Senate and the House of Commons appointed to examine and consider the Indian Act. Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence, 1946–1948.</li>
				<li>Canada. Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations. “Canada’s Statement on the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples Outcome Document.” New York, 22 September 2014. <a href="http://www.canadainternational.gc.ca/prmny-mponu/canada_un-canada_onu/statements-declarations/other-autres/2014-09-22_WCIPD-PADD.aspx?lang=eng" >http://www.canadainternational.gc.ca/prmny-mponu/canada_un-canada_onu/statements-declarations/other-autres/2014-09-22_WCIPD-PADD.aspx?lang=eng</a> (accessed 17 March 2015).</li>
				<li>Canada. Prime Minister Stephen Harper. “Statement of Apology – to former students of Indian Residential Schools.” 11 June 2008. <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100015644/1100100015649" >http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100015644/1100100015649</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Public Safety Canada, Aboriginal Corrections Policy Unit. <i class="citetitle">Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and the Criminal Justice System.</i> 2010. <a href="http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/ftl-lchl-spctrm/ftl-lchl-spctrm-eng.pdf" >http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/ftl-lchl-spctrm/ftl-lchl-spctrm-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Royal Canadian Mounted Police. <i class="citetitle">Missing and Murdered Aboriginal Women: A National Operational Overview</i>. Cat. no.: PS64-115/2014E-PDF, 2014. <a href="http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/pubs/mmaw-faapd-eng.pdf" >http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/pubs/mmaw-faapd-eng.pdf</a> (accessed 31 December 2014).</li>
				<li>Canada. Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. <i class="citetitle">Highlights from the report of the Royal Commis- sion on Aboriginal Peoples: People to People, Nation to Nation.</i> Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services Canada, 1996. <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100014597/1100100014637" >http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100014597/1100100014637</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. <i class="citetitle">Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples.</i> Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services Canada, 1996.</li>
				<li>Canada. <i class="citetitle">Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian Policy.</i> Presented to the first session of the 28th Parliament by the Honourable Jean Chrétien, Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer, 1969.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “2006 Census Inuit Tables.” Catalogue no. 89-636-x. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-636-x/89-636-x2008001-eng.htm" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-636-x/89-636-x2008001-eng.htm</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “Aboriginal People in Canada: First Nations People, Metis and Inuit.” National Household Survey, 2011. Catalogue no. 99-011-X2011001. Ottawa: Ministry of Industry, 2013. <a href="http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011001-eng.pdf" >http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011001-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “Aboriginal Peoples and Language.” National Household Survey (NHS), 2011. Catalogue no. 99-011-X2011003. <a href="http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011003_1-eng.cfm" >http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011003_1-eng.cfm</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “Fact Sheet – 2011 National Household Survey Aboriginal Demo- graphics, Educational Attainment and Labour Market Outcomes.” 15 August 2013. <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1376329205785/1376329233875" >https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1376329205785/1376329233875</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “Mortality rates among children and teenagers living in Inuit Nunangat, 1994 to 2008.” Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2012. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-003-x/2012003/article/11695-eng.htm" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-003-x/2012003/article/11695-eng.htm</a></li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “Population reporting an Aboriginal identity, by mother tongue, by province and territory (2006 Census).” 16 January 2008. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/demo38a-eng.htm" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/demo38a-eng.htm</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “Select health indicators of First Nations people living off reserve, Métis and Inuit, 2007 to 2010.” 29 January 2013. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130129/dq130129b-eng.htm" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130129/dq130129b-eng.htm</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “The Educational Attainment of Aboriginal People in Canada.” <i class="citetitle">National Household Survey, 2011</i>. Catalogue no. 99-012-X2011003. <a href="https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-012-x/99-012-x2011003_3-eng.cfm" >https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-012-x/99-012-x2011003_3-eng.cfm</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada. “Youth Court Statistics 2011/2012.” <i class="citetitle">The Daily,</i> 13 June 2013. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130613/dq130613d-eng.pdf" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130613/dq130613d-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canada. Statistics Canada<i class="citetitle">. Educational Portrait of Canada, Census Year 2006.</i> Catalogue no. 97- 560-XIE2006001. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2006.</li>
				<li>Canadian Museum of Civilization and the Canadian War Museum. “Research Strategy.” 15 July 2013. <a href="http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf" >http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Council of Ministers of Education. “Education Ministers Signal Transformation Key to the Future.” Press Release. 9 July 2014. <a href="http://cmec.ca/278/Press-Releases/Education-Ministers-Signal-Transformation-Key-to-the-Future.html?id_article=826" >http://cmec.ca/278/Press-Releases/Education-Ministers-Signal-Transformation-Key-to-the-Future.html?id_article=826</a>.</li>
				<li>Davin, Nicholas Flood. <i class="citetitle">Report on Industrial Schools for Indians and Half-Breeds.</i> Report produced for the Minister of the Interior. Ottawa: 1879.</li>
				<li>Eyford, Douglas R. “Forging Partnerships, Building Relationships: Aboriginal Canadians and Ener- gy Development.” Report to the Prime Minister, November 2013. <a href="https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/www/pdf/publications/ForgPart-Online-e.pdf" >https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/www/pdf/publications/ForgPart-Online-e.pdf</a> (accessed 26 March 2015).</li>
				<li>Fraser, R. D. “Section B: Vital Statistics and Health.” In <i class="citetitle">Historical Statistics of Canada</i>, edited by F. H. Leachy. Second edition. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 1983. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-516-x/sectionb/4147437-eng.htm" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-516-x/sectionb/4147437-eng.htm</a>.</li>
				<li>Indian and Métis Conference, Committee of the Community Welfare Planning Council. <i class="citetitle">Survey of Canadian History Textbooks</i>. Winnipeg: Submission to the Curriculum Revision Committee, Manitoba Department of Education, 1964.</li>
				<li>LeBeuf, Marcel-Eugène. <i class="citetitle">The Role of the RCMP during the Indian Residential School System</i>. Ottawa: Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 2011.</li>
				<li>MacPherson, Patricia, and Albert Chudley. <i class="citetitle">Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) in a correctional population: Prevalence, screening, and characteristics</i>. Ottawa: Correctional Service of Canada, 2011. <a href="http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/lbrr/archives/cn21451-eng.pdf" >http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/lbrr/archives/cn21451-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Maire, Sinha, editor. “Measuring Violence Against Women: Statistical Trends.” Catalogue no. 85-002-X . Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2013.</li>
				<li>Mitten, H. Rae. “Section 9: Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders and the Justice System.” The First Nations and Métis Justice Reform Commission Final Report, Volume II. January 2004. <a href="http://www.justicereformcomm.sk.ca/volume2/12section9.pdf" >http://www.justicereformcomm.sk.ca/volume2/12section9.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Munch, Christopher. “Youth correctional statistics in Canada, 2010/2011.” <i class="citetitle">Juristat</i>. Catalogue no. 85‐002‐X. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2012. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2012001/article/11716-eng.pdf" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2012001/article/11716-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Norris, Mary Jane. “Aboriginal Languages in Canada: Emerging Trends and Perspectives on Second Language Acquisition.” Catalogue No. 11-008. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2007.</li>
				<li>Perreault, Samuel. “<i class="citetitle">Admissions to Youth Correctional Services in Canada 2011–2012</i>.” <i class="citetitle">Juristat</i>, 2014. Catalogue no. 85-002-x. Ottawa : Statisitics Canada, 2014. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11917-eng.htm#a5" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11917-eng.htm#a5</a>.</li>
				<li>Perreault, Samuel. “Adult Correctional Services in Canada 2011-2012.” <i class="citetitle">Juristat</i>. Catalogue no. 85-002-x. Ottawa: Statisitics Canada, 2014. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5</a>.</li>
				<li>Perreault, Samuel. “Violent victimization of Aboriginal people in the Canadian provinces, 2009.” <i class="citetitle">Juristat</i>. Catalogue no. 85-002-X. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2011. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11415-eng.pdf" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11415-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Quebec. <i class="citetitle">Rapport de la Commission royale d’enquête sur l’enseignement dans la province de Québec</i>. Quebec: Government of Quebec, 1966. <a href="http://classiques.uqac.ca/contemporains/quebec_commission_parent/rapport_parent_4/rapport_parent_vol_4.pdf" >http://classiques.uqac.ca/contemporains/quebec_commission_parent/rapport_parent_4/rapport_parent_vol_4.pdf</a> (accessed 7 August 2012).</li>
				<li>Reed, Micheline, and Peter Morrison. “Adult Correctional Services in Canada 1995–96.” <i class="citetitle">Juristat</i> 17, no. 4. Catalogue no. 85-002-XPE. Ottawa: Statisitics Canada, 1997. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x1997004-eng.pdf" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x1997004-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Rosenthal, Jeffrey S. “Statistical Analysis of Deaths at Residential Schools: Conducted on behalf of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada.” January 2015.</li>
				<li>Ryerson, Egerton. “Report on Industrial Schools, 26 May 1847.” In <i class="citetitle">Statistics Respecting Indian Schools</i>. Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1898.</li>
				<li>Ryerson, Egerton. <i class="citetitle">Report on a System for Public Elementary Instruction for Upper Canada</i>. Printed by order of the Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada. Montreal: Lovell &amp; Gibson, 1847.</li>
				<li>Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada and the University of Manitoba. Centre for Truth and Reconciliation Trust Deed, 21 June 2013. <a href="http://umanitoba.ca/admin/indigenous_connect/media/IND-00-013-NRCAS-TrustDeed.pdf" >http://umanitoba.ca/admin/indigenous_connect/media/IND-00-013-NRCAS-TrustDeed.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. “Atlantic National Event Concept Paper.” Halifax, Nova Scotia, 26–29 October 2011. <a href="http://www.myrobust.com/websites/atlantic/File/Concept%20Paper%20atlantic%20august%2010%20km_cp%20_3_.pdf" >http://www.myrobust.com/websites/atlantic/File/Concept%20Paper%20atlantic%20august%2010%20km_cp%20_3_.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. “Centre for Truth and Reconciliation Administrative Agreement.” <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Centre_For_Truth_and_Reconciliation_Administrative_Agreement.pdf" >http://chrr.info/images/stories/Centre_For_Truth_and_Reconciliation_Administrative_Agreement.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. <i class="citetitle">Educating our Youth</i> (video). 19 September 2013. <a href="http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=3" >http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=3</a> (accessed 10 February 2014).</li>
				<li>Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. <i class="citetitle">Truth and Reconciliation Commission: Interim Report.</i> Winnipeg: Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2012.</li>
				<li>United States. Board of Indian Commissioners. <i class="citetitle">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Board of Indian Commissioners, 1886</i>. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1887.</li>
				<li>United States. Department of the Interior, Office of the Solicitor. Solicitor’s Opinions on Native American Issues. <a href="http://www.doi.gov/solicitor/opinions.html" >http://www.doi.gov/solicitor/opinions.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Ziestsma, Danielle. “Aboriginal People Living Off-reserve and the Labour Market: Estimates from the Labour Force Survey, 2008–2009.” Catalogue no. 710588-X, no. 2. Ottawa: Statistics Canada, 2010. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/71-588-x/71-588-x2010001-eng.pdf" >http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/71-588-x/71-588-x2010001-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
			</ul>

			<h4>6. Legislation</h4>

			<ul class="bibliolist">
				<li><i class="citetitle">Act to amend the Museums Act in order to establish the Canadian Museum of History, Statutes of Canada</i>, 2013, chapter 38.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">An Act respecting Indians</i> [<i class="citetitle">Indian Act</i>], <i class="citetitle">Statutes of Canada</i> 1951, chapter 29, sections 113–122, 169–172.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Broadcasting Act</i>, <i class="citetitle">Statutes of Canada</i> 1991, chapter 11.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Corrections and Conditional Release Act</i>, <i class="citetitle">Statutes of Canada</i> 1992, chapter 20.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Criminal Code, Statutes of Canada</i>, 1985, chapter C-46.</li>
				<li>Great Britain. <i class="citetitle">Rupert’s Land and North-Western Territory Order</i> (Order of Her Majesty in Council Admitting Rupert’s Land and the North-Western Territory into the Union), 23 June 1870. Schedule A, <i class="citetitle">Rupert’s Land Act</i> 1868, 31–32 Vict., chapter 105 (U.K.). <a href="http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/csj-sjc/constitution/lawreg-loireg/p1t32.html" >http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/csj-sjc/constitution/lawreg-loireg/p1t32.html</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Historic Sites and Monuments Act, Statutes of Canada</i> 1985, chapter H4.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Museums Act, Statutes of Canada</i> 1990, chapter 3, section 3.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Physical Activity and Sport Act, Statutes of Canada</i> 2003, chapter 2.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Public Schools Act</i>, <i class="citetitle">Statutes of Manitoba</i> 1954, chapter 215, pages 923–1,114.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Safe Streets and Communities Act, Statutes of Canada</i> 2012, chapter 1.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Youth Criminal Justice Act, Statutes of Canada</i> 2002, chapter 1, section 38(1).</li>
			</ul>

			<h4>7. Legal Cases</h4>
			<ul class="bibliolist">
				<li><i class="citetitle">Cloud v. Canada (Attorney General)</i> [2004] OJ 4924, 247 DLR (4th) 667.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Delgamuukw v. British Columbia</i> [1997] 3 SCR 1010.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General)</i> [2011] ONSC 4938.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General)</i> [2013] ONSC 684.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Grassy Narrows First Nation v. Ontario (Natural Resources</i>) [2014] SCC 48.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Guerin v. R.</i> [1984] 2 SCR.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests)</i> [2004] 3 SCR 511.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Manitoba Métis Nation Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General)</i> [2013] SCC 14.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian Heritage)</i> [2005] 3 SCR 388, [2005] SCC 69.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Pictou Landing Band Council v. Canada (Attorney General)</i> [2013] FC 342.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Comeau</i> [1998] NWTJ 34 (NTSC).</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Constant</i> [2005] Man. QB (Dauphin) (CR03-05-00069).</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Frappier</i> [1990] YJ 163 (Terr. Ct.).</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Gladue</i> [1999] 1 SCR 688.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Hands</i> [1996] OJ 264.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Harris</i> [2002] BCCA 152.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Ipeelee</i> [2012] 1 SCR 433, [2012] SCC 13.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Leroux</i> [1998] NWTJ 139 (SC).</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Plint</i> [1995] BCJ 3060 (BCSC).</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Smickle</i> [2012] ONSC 602.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Sparrow</i> [1990] 1 SCR 1075.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Vanderpeet</i> [1996] 2 SCR 507.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">R. v. Maczynski</i> [1997] CanLII 2491 (BCCA) (appeal of sentence).</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Rio Tinto Alcan Inc. v. Carrier Sekani Tribal Council</i> [2010] SCC 43, [2010] 2 SCR 650.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">S. L. v. Commission scolaire des Chênes</i> [2012] SCC 7.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia</i> [2014] SCC 44.</li>
			</ul>



			<h4>8. Other Sources</h4>
			<ul class="bibliolist">
				<li>de Greiff, Pablo. <i class="citetitle">Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparations and guarantees on non-recurrence</i>. New York: United Nations General Assembly, Human Rights Council, 2012. <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-46_en.pdf" >http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-46_en.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>United Nations General Assembly. “Outcome Document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly know as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples.” 25 September 2014. <a href="http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/69/2" >http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/69/2</a> (accessed 15 March 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations General Assembly. “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, James Anaya, The Situation of Indigenous Peoples in Canada.” <a href="http://unsr.jamesanaya.org/docs/countries/2014-report-canada-a-hrc-27-52-add-2-en.pdf" >http://unsr.jamesanaya.org/docs/countries/2014-report-canada-a-hrc-27-52-add-2-en.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>United Nations General Assembly. “United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.” Adopted by the General Assembly, 2 October 2007. <a href="http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf" >http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf</a> (accessed 15 March 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations General Assembly. Human Rights Council. UN Expert Mechanism of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. “Access to justice in the promotion and protection of the rights of indigenous peoples.” 29 April 2013. <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/IPeoples/EMRIP/Session6/A-HRC-EMRIP-2013-2_en.pdf" >http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/IPeoples/EMRIP/Session6/A-HRC-EMRIP-2013-2_en.pdf</a> (accessed 21 March 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations Global Compact. “A Business Reference Guide: United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.” New York: UN Global Compact, 2013. <a href="https://www.unglobalcom-pact.org/docs/issues_doc/human_rights/IndigenousPeoples/BusinessGuide.pdf" >https://www.unglobalcom-pact.org/docs/issues_doc/human_rights/IndigenousPeoples/BusinessGuide.pdf</a> (accessed 26 March 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations. Committee on the Rights of the Child. “Concluding observations on the combined third and fourth periodic report of Canada, adopted by the Committee at its sixty-first session (17 September–5 October 2012).” <a href="http://www.unicef.ca/sites/default/files/imce_uploads/TAKE%20ACTION/ADVOCATE/DOCS/uncrc_concluding_observations_for_canada_december_2012.pdf" >http://www.unicef.ca/sites/default/files/imce_uploads/TAKE%20ACTION/ADVOCATE/DOCS/uncrc_concluding_observations_for_canada_december_2012.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>United Nations. Economic and Social Council. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. “Study on the impacts of the Doctrine of Discovery on indigenous peoples, including mechanisms, processes, and instruments of redress.” Thirteen Session, New York, 12–23 May 2014. <a href="http://daccessdds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf" >http://daccessdds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf</a> (accessed 14 March 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations. Human Rights Council. “Report of the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights, Farida Shaheed. Memorialization processes.” 23 January 2014. <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx" >http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx</a>.</li>
				<li>United Nations. Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. <i class="citetitle">International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights</i>, article 27. <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr" >http://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr</a>. aspx.</li>
				<li>United Nations. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. “Study on the impacts of the Doctrine of Discovery on indigenous peoples, including mechanisms, processes and instruments of redress.” New York, 24 February 2014. <a href="http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf?OpenElement" >http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf?OpenElement</a> (accessed 14 March 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations. Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Joint Statement of the Assembly of First Nations, Chiefs of Ontario, Grand Council of the Crees (Eeyou Istchee), Amnesty International, and the Canadian Friends Service Committee (Quakers), KAIROS: Canadian Ecumenical Justice Initiatives to 11th session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, New York, 7–18 May 2012. <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/pfii_2012_-_doctrine_of_discovery_-_joint_statement_fe.pdf" >http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/pfii_2012_-_doctrine_of_discovery_-_joint_statement_fe.pdf</a> (accessed 20 March 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations. Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See. Statement to Economic and Social Council, 9th session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues on Agenda item 7: Discus- sion on the reports “Impact on Indigenous Peoples of the International Legal construct known as the Doctrine of Discovery, which has served as the Foundation of the Violation of the Human Rights” and “Indigenous Peoples and Boarding Schools: A Comparative Study.” New York, 27 April 2010. <a href="http://www.ailanyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Holy-See.pdf" >http://www.ailanyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Holy-See.pdf</a> (accessed 20 January 2015).</li>
				<li>United Nations. UN Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See. “A Short History of the Diplomacy of the Holy See.” <a href="http://www.holyseemission.org/about/history-of-diplomacy-of-the-holy-see.aspx" >http://www.holyseemission.org/about/history-of-diplomacy-of-the-holy-see.aspx</a>.</li>
				<li>Vatican. Communiqué of the Holy See Press Office. 29 April 2009. <a href="http://www.vatican.va/resources/resources_canada-first-nations-apr2009_en.html" >http://www.vatican.va/resources/resources_canada-first-nations-apr2009_en.html</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
				<li>Vatican. Pastoral Letter of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI to the Catholics of Ireland, 19 March 2010. <a href="http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/letters/2010/documents/hf_ben-xvi_let_20100319_church-ireland_en.html" >http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/letters/2010/documents/hf_ben-xvi_let_20100319_church-ireland_en.html</a> (accessed 27 November 2014).</li>
			</ul>

			<h3>Secondary Sources</h3>
			<h4>1. Books and Published Reports</h4>
			<ul class="bibliolist">
				<li>Aboriginal Peoples’ Television Network. <i class="citetitle">Annual Report</i>. 2013. <a href="http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/APTN_2013_AnnualReport_ENG.pdf" >http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/APTN_2013_AnnualReport_ENG.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Ahenakew, Edward. <i class="citetitle">Voices of the Plains Cree</i>. Edited by Ruth M. Buck. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1973.</li>
				<li>Alfred, Gerald (Taiaiake). <i class="citetitle">Heeding the Voices of Our Ancestors: Kahnawake Mohawk Politics and the Rise of Native Nationalism.</i> Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1995.</li>
				<li>Amagoalik, John. <i class="citetitle">Changing the Face of Canada: The Life Story of John Amagoalik.</i> Edited by Louis McComber. Life Stories of Northern Leaders 2. Iqaluit: Nunavut Arctic College, 2007.</li>
				<li>Anderson, Mark Cronlund, and Carmen L. Robertson. <i class="citetitle">Seeing Red: A History of Natives in Canadian Newspapers.</i> Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press, 2011.</li>
				<li>Archibald, Linda, with Jonathan Dewar, Carrie Reid, and Vanessa Stevens. <i class="citetitle">Dancing, Singing, Painting, and Speaking the Healing Story: Healing through Creative Arts.</i> Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2012.</li>
				<li>Armitage, David. <i class="citetitle">The Ideological Origins of the British Empire</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.</li>
				<li>Assembly of First Nations. “IndigenACTION: Phase One: Roundtable Report.” 2012. <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/indigenaction/indigenactionroundtablereport.pdf" >http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/indigenaction/indigenactionroundtablereport.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Assembly of First Nations. <i class="citetitle">Assembly of First Nations Report on Canada’s Dispute Resolution Plan to Compensate for Abuses in Indian Residential Schools.</i> Ottawa: Assembly of First Nations, 2004.</li>
				<li>Assembly of First Nations. <i class="citetitle">Breaking the Silence: An Interpretive Study of Residential School Impact and Healing as Illustrated by the Stories of First Nation Individuals</i>. Ottawa: Assembly of First Nations, 1994.</li>
				<li>Assembly of First Nations. National Panel on First Nation Elementary and Secondary Education for Students on Reserve. <i class="citetitle">Nurturing the Learning Spirit of First Nation Students</i>. National Assembly of First Nations, 2012. <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education2/national-panel.pdf" >http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education2/national-panel.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Assembly of First Nations. <i class="citetitle">Royal Commission Aboriginal Peoples at 10 Years: A Report Card.</i> Ottawa: Assembly of First Nations, 2006.</li>
				<li>Auger, Donald J. <i class="citetitle">Indian Residential Schools in Ontario</i>. Ontario: Nishnawbe Aski Nation, 2005.</li>
				<li>Axtell, James. <i class="citetitle">The Invasion Within: The Contest of Cultures in Colonial North America</i>. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.</li>
				<li>Baker, Simon. <i class="citetitle">Khot-La-Cha: The Autobiography of Chief Simon Baker</i>. Compiled and edited by Verna J. Kirkness. Vancouver: Douglas and McIntyre, 1994.</li>
				<li>Banner, Stuart. <i class="citetitle">How the Indians Lost Their Land: Law and Power on the Frontier</i>. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Barkan, Elazar, and Alexander Karn, eds. <i class="citetitle">Taking Wrongs Seriously: Apologies and Reconciliation.</i> Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 2006.</li>
				<li>Barron, Laurie F. <i class="citetitle">Walking in Indian Moccasins: The Native Policies of Tommy Douglas and the CCF</i>. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1997.</li>
				<li>Bartels, Dennis A., and Alice L. Bartels. <i class="citetitle">When the North was Red</i>. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1995.</li>
				<li>Battiste, Marie. <i class="citetitle">Decolonizing Education: Nourishing the Learning Spirit.</i> Saskatoon: Purich Publishing, 2013.</li>
				<li>Bayly, C. A. <i class="citetitle">The Birth of the Modern World: 1780–1914.</i> Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004. Blackstock, C., T. Prakash, J. Loxley, F. Wien. <i class="citetitle">Wen:de: We are Coming to the Light of Day</i>. Ottawa: First Nations Child and Family Caring Society of Canada, 2005.</li>
				<li>Bloch, Alexia. <i class="citetitle">Red Ties and Residential Schools: Indigenous Siberians in a Post-Soviet State</i>. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004.</li>
				<li>Blue Quills First Nations College. <i class="citetitle">Pimohteskanaw, 1971–2001: Blue Quills First Nations College</i>. St. Paul, Alberta: Blue Quills First Nations College, 2002.</li>
				<li>Bodnar, John. <i class="citetitle">Remaking America: Public Memory, Commemoration and Patriotism in the Twentieth Century.</i> Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.</li>
				<li>Bolt, Clarence. <i class="citetitle">Thomas Crosby and the Tsimshian: Small Shoes for Feet Too Large</i>. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1992.</li>
				<li>Booth, W. James. <i class="citetitle">Communities of Memory: On Witness, Identity, and Justice</i>. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 2006.</li>
				<li>Borrows, John. <i class="citetitle">Canada’s Indigenous Constitution</i>. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010.</li>
				<li>Borrows, John. <i class="citetitle">Recovering Canada: The Resurgence of Indigenous Law.</i> Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2002.</li>
				<li>Brass, Eleanor. <i class="citetitle">I Walk in Two Worlds</i>. Calgary: Glenbow Museum, 1987.</li>
				<li>Bruno-Jofre, Rosa. <i class="citetitle">The Missionary Oblate Sisters: Vision and Mission</i>. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Bryce, P. H. <i class="citetitle">The Story of a National Crime: Being an Appeal for Justice to the Indians of Canada; the Wards of the Nation, Our Allies in the Revolutionary War, Our Brothers-in-Arms in the Great War</i>. Ottawa: James Hope and Sons, 1922.</li>
				<li>Buck, Ruth Matheson. <i class="citetitle">The Doctor Rode Side-Saddle</i>. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1974.</li>
				<li>Bush, Peter. <i class="citetitle">Western Challenge: The Presbyterian Church in Canada’s Mission on the Prairies and North, 1885–1925</i>. Winnipeg: Watson and Dwyer Publishing, 2000.</li>
				<li>Butcher, Margaret. <i class="citetitle">The Letters of Margaret Butcher: Missionary-Imperialism on the North Pacific Coast</i>. Edited by Mary-Ellen Kelm. Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2006.</li>
				<li>Campbell, Sue. <i class="citetitle">Our Faithfulness to the Past: The Ethics and Politics of Memory</i>. Edited by Christine M. Koggel and Rockney Jacobsen. New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.</li>
				<li>Canadian Bar Association. <i class="citetitle">Submission on Bill C-10: Safe Streets and Communities Act</i>. Ottawa: Canadian Bar Association, October 2011. <a href="http://www.cba.org/cba/submissions/PDF/11-45-eng.pdf" >http://www.cba.org/cba/submissions/PDF/11-45-eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Canadian Welfare Council. <i class="citetitle">Indian Residential Schools: A Research Study of the Child Care Programs of Nine Residential Schools in Saskatchewan</i>. Prepared for the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development. Ottawa: Canadian Welfare Council, 1967.</li>
				<li>Canadien, Albert. <i class="citetitle">From Lishamie</i>. Penticton: Theytus Books, Limited, 2010.</li>
				<li>Carter, Sarah<i class="citetitle">. Lost Harvests: Prairie Indian Reserve Farmers and Government Policy.</i> Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1990.</li>
				<li>CBC-Radio Canada. “Going the Distance: Annual Report 2013–2014.” <a href="http://www.cbc.radio-canada.ca/_files/cbcrc/documents/annual-report/2013-2014/cbc-radio-canada-annual-report-2013-2014.pdf" >http://www.cbc.radio-canada.ca/_files/cbcrc/documents/annual-report/2013-2014/cbc-radio-canada-annual-report-2013-2014.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Centre for Youth and Society. “Residential Schools Resistance Narratives: Strategies and Significance for Indigenous Youth.” University of Victoria, 27 March 2012. Research report prepared for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada.</li>
				<li>Chamberlin, J. Edward. <i class="citetitle">If This is Your Land, Where are Your Stories? Finding Common Ground.</i> Toronto: Alfred A. Knopf Canada, 2003.</li>
				<li>Chansonneuve, Deborah. <i class="citetitle">Addictive Behaviours Among Aboriginal People in Canada.</i> Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2007.</li>
				<li>Charrette on Energy, Environment and Aboriginal Issues, The. “Responsible Energy Resource Development in Canada: Summary of the Dialogue of the Charrette on Energy, Environment and Aboriginal Issues.” December 2013. <a href="http://www.boldon.org/pdf/EnergyCharrette.pdf" >http://www.boldon.org/pdf/EnergyCharrette.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Chartrand, Larry N., Tricia E. Logan, and Judy D. Daniels. <i class="citetitle">Métis History and Experience and Residential Schools in Canada</i>. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2006.</li>
				<li>Choquette, Robert. <i class="citetitle">Canada’s Religions: An Historical Introduction</i>. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, 2004.</li>
				<li>Choquette, Robert. <i class="citetitle">The Oblate Assault on Canada’s Northwest</i>. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press, 1995.</li>
				<li>Coates, Kenneth, and Dwight Newman. “The End is Not Nigh: Reason over Alarmism in Analysing the <i class="citetitle">Tsilhqot’in</i> Decision.” Ottawa: MacDonald Laurier Institute, September 2014. <a href="http://www.macdonaldlaurier.ca/files/pdf/MLITheEndIsNotNigh.pdf" >http://www.macdonaldlaurier.ca/files/pdf/MLITheEndIsNotNigh.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Coates, Kenneth. <i class="citetitle">A Global History of Indigenous Peoples: Struggle and Survival</i>. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.</li>
				<li>Coccola, Nicolas. <i class="citetitle">They Call Me Father: Memoirs of Father Nicolas Coccola</i>. Edited by Margaret Whitehead. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1988.</li>
				<li>Cohen, Cynthia E., Roberto Gutiérrez Varea, and Polly O. Walker, editors. <i class="citetitle">Acting Together: Performance and the Creative Transformation of Conflict.</i> Volumes 1 and 2. Oakland, California: New Village Press, 2011.</li>
				<li>Cole, Douglas, and Ira Chaikin. <i class="citetitle">An Iron Hand Upon the People: The Law Against the Potlatch on the Northwest Coast</i>. Vancouver: Douglas and McIntyre, 1990.</li>
				<li>Cronin, Kay. <i class="citetitle">Cross in the Wilderness</i>. Vancouver: Mitchell Press, 1960.</li>
				<li>Daschuk, James. <i class="citetitle">Clearing the Plains: Disease, Politics of Starvation and the Loss of Aboriginal Life.</i> Regina: University of Regina Press, 2013.</li>
				<li>David, Jennifer. “Aboriginal Languages Broadcasting in Canada: An Overview and Recommendations to the Task Force on Aboriginal Languages and Cultures.” Report for Aboriginal Peoples Television Network. 2004. <a href="http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/Aboriginal_Language_and_Broadcasting_2004.pdf" >http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/Aboriginal_Language_and_Broadcasting_2004.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Dewar, Jonathan, David Gaertner, Ayumi Goto, Ashok Mathur, and Sophie McCall. “Practicing Reconciliation: a collaborative study of Aboriginal art, resistance and cultural politics.” Report commissioned by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission on Indian Residential Schools, 2013.</li>
				<li>Diffie, Bailey W., and George D. Winius. <i class="citetitle">Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580</i>. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1978.</li>
				<li>Dion, Joseph F. <i class="citetitle">My Tribe the Crees</i>. Edited and with an introduction by Hugh Dempsey. Second edition. Calgary: Glenbow Museum, 1996.</li>
				<li>Duchaussois, J. R. <i class="citetitle">The Grey Nuns in the Far North (1867–1917)</i>. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1919.</li>
				<li>Elliott, John H. <i class="citetitle">Empires of the Atlantic World: Britain and Spain in America, 1492–1830</i>. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 2007.</li>
				<li>Erasmus, Peter. <i class="citetitle">Buffalo Days and Nights</i>. Calgary: Fifth House Publishers, 1999. First published 1976 by Glenbow-Alberta Institute.</li>
				<li>Fear-Segal, Jacqueline. <i class="citetitle">White Man’s Club: Schools, Race, and the Struggle of Indian Acculturation</i>. Lincoln: University of Nebraska, 2007.</li>
				<li>First Nations Centre. <i class="citetitle">First Nations Regional Longitudinal Health Survey (RHS) 2002/03.</i> Ottawa: First Nations Centre, 2005.</li>
				<li>First Nations Education Council (FNEC), Quebec, Nishnawbe Aski Nation (NAN), Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations (FSIN). <i class="citetitle">Report on Priority Actions in View of Improving First Nations Education</i>. November 2011. <a href="http://www.fsin.com/index.php/downloads-education/708-report-on-priority-actions-in-view-of-improving-first-nations-education" >http://www.fsin.com/index.php/downloads-education/708-report-on-priority-actions-in-view-of-improving-first-nations-education</a>.</li>
				<li>First Nations Education Council. <i class="citetitle">Funding Formula for First Nation Schools: The Instrument of a Detrimental Policy</i>. 2009. <a href="http://www.cepn-fnec.com/PDF/etudes_documents/fiche_complete_eng.pdf" >http://www.cepn-fnec.com/PDF/etudes_documents/fiche_complete_eng.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Fisher, Robin. <i class="citetitle">Contact and Conflict: Indian-European Relations in British Columbia, 1774–1890.</i> Second edition. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1992.</li>
				<li>Fisher, Robin. <i class="citetitle">Contact and Conflict: Indian–European Relations in British Columbia, 1774–1890.</i> Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1992.</li>
				<li>Fontaine, Theodore. <i class="citetitle">Broken Circle: The Dark Legacy of Indian Residential Schools</i>. Vancouver: Heritage House, 2010.</li>
				<li>French, Alice. <i class="citetitle">My Name Is Masak</i>. Winnipeg: Peguis Publishers, 1976.</li>
				<li>Frichner, Tonya Gonnella. <i class="citetitle">Preliminary Study of the Impact on Indigenous Peoples of the International Legal Construct Known as the Doctrine of Discovery</i>. New York: United Nations, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, 2010.</li>
				<li>Gagan, Rosemary R. <i class="citetitle">A Sensitive Independence: Canadian Methodist Women Missionaries in Canada and the Orient, 1881–1925</i>. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1992.</li>
				<li>Getty, A. L., and Antoine S. Lussier. <i class="citetitle">As Long as the Sun Shines and Water Flows: A Reader in Canadian Native Studies</i>. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1983.</li>
				<li>Goodwill, Jean, and Norma Sluman. <i class="citetitle">John Tootoosis</i>. Winnipeg: Pemmican Publications, 1984. Gordon, Mary. <i class="citetitle">Roots of Empathy: Changing the World Child by Child</i>. New York: The Experiment, 2009.</li>
				<li>Graham, Elizabeth. <i class="citetitle">The Mush Hole: Life at Two Indian Residential Schools</i>. Waterloo: Heffle Publishing, 1997.</li>
				<li>Hamilton, W. D. <i class="citetitle">The Federal Indian Day Schools of the Maritimes</i>. Fredericton, New Brunswick: Micmac-Maliseet Institute, University of New Brunswick, 1986.</li>
				<li>Head, Edmund Walker, Froome Talfourd, Thomas Worthington, and Richard T. Pennefather. <i class="citetitle">Report of the Special Commissioners appointed on the 8th of September 1856, to Investigate Indian Affairs in Canada</i>. Toronto: Stewart Derbishire and George Desbarats, 1858.</li>
				<li>Hobsbawm, E. J. <i class="citetitle">On Empire: America, War and Global Supremacy</i>. New York: Pantheon Books, 2008.</li>
				<li>Hodgson-Smith, Kathy. <i class="citetitle">The State of Métis Nation Learning</i>. Canadian Council on Learning, 2005. <a href="http://www.ccl-cca.ca/pdfs/AbLKC/StateOfMetisNationLearning.pdf" >http://www.ccl-cca.ca/pdfs/AbLKC/StateOfMetisNationLearning.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Howe, Stephen. <i class="citetitle">Empire: A Very Short Introduction.</i> Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.</li>
				<li>Huel, Raymond J. A. <i class="citetitle">Proclaiming the Gospel to the Indians and Métis</i>. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1996.</li>
				<li>Hughes, Kenneth James, and Jackson Beardy. <i class="citetitle">Jackson Beardy, Life and Art</i>. Winnipeg: Canadian Dimension Publishers, 1979.</li>
				<li>Hyam, Ronald. <i class="citetitle">Britain’s Imperial Century, 1815–1914: A Study of Empire and Expansion</i>. Third edition. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.</li>
				<li>Indian Chiefs of Alberta. <i class="citetitle">Citizens Plus</i>. 1970. Reprinted in <i class="citetitle">Aboriginal Policy Studies</i> 1, no. 2 (2011): 188–281.</li>
				<li>Istvanffy, Jay. <i class="citetitle">Gladue Primer</i>. Vancouver: Legal Services Society, BC, 2001. <a href="http://resources.lss.bc.ca/pdfs/pubs/Gladue-Primer-eng.pdf" >http://resources.lss.bc.ca/pdfs/pubs/Gladue-Primer-eng.pdf</a>. [link expired but publication can be found at <a href="https://pubsdb.lss.bc.ca/pdfs/pubs/Gladue-Primer-eng.pdf" >https://pubsdb.lss.bc.ca/pdfs/pubs/Gladue-Primer-eng.pdf</a>]</li>
				<li>Jaenen, Cornelius. <i class="citetitle">Friend and Foe Aspects of French-Amerindian Cultural Contact in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries</i>. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1976.</li>
				<li>Johnston, Sheila M. F. <i class="citetitle">Buckskin &amp; Broadcloth: A Celebration of E. Pauline Johnson Tekahionwake, 1861–1913</i>. Toronto: Natural Heritage/Natural History, 1997.</li>
				<li>Journalists for Human Rights. “Buried Voices: Media Coverage of Aboriginal Issues in Ontario – Media Monitoring Report, 2010-2013.” August 2013. <a href="http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1" >http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1</a>.</li>
				<li>Kino-nda-niimi Collective. <i class="citetitle">The Winter We Danced: Voices from the Past, the Future, and the Idle No More Movement.</i> Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring Publishing, 2014.</li>
				<li>Kirkness, Verna J. <i class="citetitle">Creating Space: My Life and Work in Indigenous Education</i>. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press, 2013.</li>
				<li>Kirmayer, Laurence, Gregory Brass, Tara Holton, Ken Paul, Cori Simpson, Caroline Tait. <i class="citetitle">Suicide Among Aboriginal People in Canada.</i> Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2007.</li>
				<li>LaViolette, Forrest. <i class="citetitle">The Struggle for Survival: Indian Cultures and the Protestant Ethic in British Columbia</i>, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1961.</li>
				<li>Loxley, John, Linda DeRiviere, Tara Prakash, Cindy Blackstock, Fred Wien, and Shelley Thomas Prokop. <i class="citetitle">Wen:de: The Journey Continues.</i> Ottawa: First Nations Child and Family Caring Society of Canada, 2005.</li>
				<li>Lux, Maureen K. <i class="citetitle">Medicine that Walks: Disease, Medicine and Canadian Plains Native People, 1880–1940</i>. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2001.</li>
				<li>MacDonald, David, and Daniel Wilson. <i class="citetitle">Poverty or Prosperity: Indigenous Children in Canada</i>. Ottawa: Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, 2013.</li>
				<li>MacGregor, Roy. <i class="citetitle">Chief: The Fearless Vision of Billy Diamond</i>. Toronto: Viking, 1989.</li>
				<li>Magnuson, Roger. <i class="citetitle">Education in New France</i>. Montreal, Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1992.</li>
				<li>Marks, Don. <i class="citetitle">They Call Me Chief: Warriors on Ice</i>. Winnipeg: J. Gordon Shillingford, 2008.</li>
				<li>McCarthy, Martha. <i class="citetitle">From the Great River to the Ends of the Earth: Oblate Missions to the Dene, 1847–1921</i>. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press; Western Canadian Publishers, 1995.</li>
				<li>McGregor, Heather E. <i class="citetitle">Inuit Education and Schools in the Eastern Arctic</i>. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2010.</li>
				<li>McMillan, Alan D., and Eldon Yellowhorn. <i class="citetitle">First Peoples in Canada</i>. Vancouver and Toronto: Douglas &amp; McIntyre, 2004.</li>
				<li>McNally, Vincent J. <i class="citetitle">The Lord’s Distant Vineyard: A History of the Oblates and the Catholic Community in British Columbia</i>. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 2000.</li>
				<li>McNally, Vincent J. <i class="citetitle">The Lord’s Distant Vineyard: A History of the Oblates and the Catholic Community in British Columbia</i>. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 2000.</li>
				<li>Miller, J. R. <i class="citetitle">Compact, Contract, Covenant: Aboriginal Treaty Making in Canada</i>. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009.</li>
				<li>Miller, J. R. <i class="citetitle">Lethal Legacy: Current Native Controversies in Canada.</i> Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 2004.</li>
				<li>Miller, J. R. <i class="citetitle">Skyscrapers Hide the Heavens: A History of Indian-White Relations in Canada.</i> Second edition. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2000.</li>
				<li>Miller, Robert J. et al. <i class="citetitle">Discovering Indigenous Lands: The Doctrine of Discovery in the English Colonies.</i> Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.</li>
				<li>Moine, Louise. <i class="citetitle">My Life in a Residential School</i>. Saskatchewan: Provincial Chapter Imperial Order of Daughters of the Empire, Saskatchewan, in Cooperation with the Provincial Library of Saskatch- ewan, 1975.</li>
				<li>Montour, Enos. <i class="citetitle">Brown Tom’s Schooldays</i>. Edited by Elizabeth Graham. Waterloo, Ontario: The Author, 1985.</li>
				<li>Moorhouse, Geoffrey. <i class="citetitle">The Missionaries.</i> Philadelphia and New York: J. B. Lippincott Company, 1973.</li>
				<li>Moran, Bridget. <i class="citetitle">Stoney Creek Woman: The Story of Mary John</i>. Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press, 1997.</li>
				<li>Morley, Alan. <i class="citetitle">Roar of the Breakers: A biography of Peter Kelly</i>. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1967.</li>
				<li>Morris, Alexander. <i class="citetitle">The treaties of Canada with the Indians of Manitoba and the North-West Territories, Including the Negotiations on which they were Based, and Other Information Relating thereto</i>. Saskatoon: Fifth House Publishers, 1991. First published, Toronto: Belfords, Clarke and Company, 1880.</li>
				<li>Moseley, Christopher; Nicolas, Alexandre; UNESCO. <i class="citetitle">Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger</i> 3rd ed. Paris: UNESCO Publishing, 2010.</li>
				<li>National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health, <i class="citetitle">Child and Youth Health: Child Welfare Services in Canada: Aboriginal and Mainstream.</i> Prince George: National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health, 2009.</li>
				<li>National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. <i class="citetitle">Looking for Aboriginal Health in Legislation and Policies, 1970 to 2008: The Policy Synthesis Project.</i> Prince George: National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health, 2011.</li>
				<li>National Committee on Inuit Education. <i class="citetitle">First Canadians, Canadians First: National Strategy on Inuit Education.</i> National Committee on Inuit Education, 2011. <a href="https://www.itk.ca/sites/default/files/National-Strategy-on-Inuit-Education-2011_0.pdf" >https://www.itk.ca/sites/default/files/National-Strategy-on-Inuit-Education-2011_0.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>National Indian Brotherhood. <i class="citetitle">Indian Control of Indian Education: Policy Paper Presented to the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development</i>. Ottawa: National Indian Brotherhood, 1972.</li>
				<li>Native Women’s Association of Canada. <i class="citetitle">Voices of Our Sisters in Spirit: A Report to Families and Communities</i>. Second edition. March 2009. <a href="http://www.nwac.ca/sites/default/files/download/admin/NWAC_VoicesofOurSistersInSpiritII_March2009FINAL.pdf" >http://www.nwac.ca/sites/default/files/download/admin/NWAC_VoicesofOurSistersInSpiritII_March2009FINAL.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Newcomb, Steven T. <i class="citetitle">Pagans in the Promised Land: Decoding the Doctrine of Christian Discovery.</i> Golden, Colorado: Fulcrum Publishing, 2008.</li>
				<li>Newman, Dwight. <i class="citetitle">The Rule and Role of Law: The Duty to Consult, Aboriginal Communities, and the Canadian Natural Resource Sector</i>. Ottawa: MacDonald-Laurier Institute, May 2014. <a href="http://www" >http://www</a>. macdonaldlaurier.ca/files/pdf/DutyToConsult-Final.pdf.</li>
				<li>Newman, Morton. <i class="citetitle">Indians of the Saddle Lake Reserve</i>. Edmonton: Human Resources and Development Council, 1967.</li>
				<li>Ngugi wa Thiong’o. <i class="citetitle">Dreams in a Time of War A Childhood Memoir</i>. London: Vintage Books, 2011. Nobles, Melissa. <i class="citetitle">The Politics of Official Apologies.</i> Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008. Ontario Provincial Advocate for Children and Youth. <i class="citetitle">Feathers of Hope: A First Nations Youth Action Plan</i>. 2014. <a href="http://www.inspiritfoundation.org/files/6114/0656/0111/Feathers-of-Hope_report.pdf" >http://www.inspiritfoundation.org/files/6114/0656/0111/Feathers-of-Hope_report.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Opp, James, and John C. Walsh. <i class="citetitle">Placing Memory and Remembering Place in Canada.</i> Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2010.</li>
				<li>Ospina, Maria, and Liz Dennett. <i class="citetitle">Systematic Review on the Prevalence of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders.</i> Edmonton: Institute of Health Economics, 2013.</li>
				<li>Pagden, Anthony. <i class="citetitle">Peoples and Empires: A Short History of European Migration and Conquest from Greece to the Present</i>. New York: Modern Library, 2001.</li>
				<li>Pagden, Anthony. <i class="citetitle">Spanish Imperialism and the Political Imagination: Studies in European and Spanish-American Social and Political Theory, 1513–1830</i>. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1990.</li>
				<li>Pagden, Anthony. <i class="citetitle">The Lords of All the World: Ideologies of Empire in Spain, Britain and France c. 1500–c. 1800</i>. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 1995.</li>
				<li>Paquette, Jerry, and Gérald Fallon. <i class="citetitle">First Nations Education Policy in Canada: Progress or Gridlock.</i> Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010.</li>
				<li>Parker, R. A. <i class="citetitle">Uprooted: The Shipment of Poor Children to Canada, 1867–1917</i>. Bristol, UK: Policy Press, 2010.</li>
				<li>Peake, Frank A. <i class="citetitle">The Bishop Who Ate His Boots: A Biography of Isaac O. Stringer</i>. Toronto: Anglican Church of Canada, 1966.</li>
				<li>Pertusati, Linda. In Defense of Mohawk Land: <i class="citetitle">Ethnopolitical Conflict in Native North America.</i> Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1997.</li>
				<li>Pettipas, Katherine. <i class="citetitle">Severing the Ties that Bind: Government Repression of Indigenous Ceremonies on the Prairies</i>. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press, 1994.</li>
				<li>Prairie Women’s Health Centre of Excellence. <i class="citetitle">Nitâpwewininân: Ongoing Effects of Residential Schools on Aboriginal Women—Towards Inter-Generational Reconciliation</i>. Final Report to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. March 2012.</li>
				<li>Presbyterian Church in Canada. <i class="citetitle">Acts and Proceedings of the 137th General Assembly of The Presbyterian Church in Canada</i>. 2011.</li>
				<li>Primrose, A. P. (5th Earl of Rosebery). <i class="citetitle">Australian speechlets, 1883–84</i>.</li>
				<li>Public Policy Forum. <i class="citetitle">Building Authentic Partnerships: Aboriginal Participation in Major Resource Development Opportunities</i>. Ottawa: Public Policy Forum, 2012. <a href="http://www.ppforum.ca/sites/default/files/Aboriginal%20Participation%20in%20Major%20Resource%20Development_ENG_3.pdf" >http://www.ppforum.ca/sites/default/files/Aboriginal%20Participation%20in%20Major%20Resource%20Development_ENG_3.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Quassa, Paul. <i class="citetitle">We Need to Know Who We Are: The Life Story of Paul Quassa.</i> Edited by Louis McComber. Translated by Letia Qiatsuk. Life Stories of Northern Leaders, Volume 3. Iqaluit: Nunavut Arctic College, 2008.</li>
				<li>Quiring, David M. <i class="citetitle">CCF Colonialism in Northern Saskatchewan: Battling Parish Priests, Bootleggers and Fur Sharks</i>. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2004.</li>
				<li>Ray, Arthur J. <i class="citetitle">An Illustrated History of Canada’s Native People: I have lived here since the world began</i>. Toronto: Key Porter, 2010.</li>
				<li>Ray, Arthur J., Jim Miller and Frank Tough. Bounty and Benevolence: <i class="citetitle">A History of Saskatchewan Treaties.</i> Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queens University Press, 2000.</li>
				<li>Regan, Paulette. <i class="citetitle">Unsettling the Settler Within: Indian Residential Schools, Truth Telling and Reconciliation in Canada.</i> Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2010.</li>
				<li>Richards, John, Jennifer Hove, and Kemi Afolabi. <i class="citetitle">Understanding the Aboriginal/Non-Aboriginal Gap in Student Performance: Lessons from British Columbia</i>. Toronto: CD Howe Institute, 2008. <a href="http://www.cdhowe.org/pdf/commentary_276.pdf" >http://www.cdhowe.org/pdf/commentary_276.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Rompkey, William. <i class="citetitle">The Story of Labrador</i>. Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2003.</li>
				<li>Schirch, Lisa. <i class="citetitle">Ritual and Symbol in Peacebuilding</i>. Bloomfield, CT: Kumarian Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Seed, Patricia. <i class="citetitle">Ceremonies of Possession in Europe’s Conquest of the New World, 1492–1640</i>. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press, 1995.</li>
				<li>Seixas, Peter, and Jill Colyer. “A Report on the National Meeting of the Historical Thinking Project.” 15–17 January 2013. <a href="http://historicalthinking.ca/sites/default/files/files/docs/HTP2013Report.pdf" >http://historicalthinking.ca/sites/default/files/files/docs/HTP2013Report.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015).</li>
				<li>Shanahan, David F. <i class="citetitle">The Jesuit Residential School at Spanish: “More than Mere Talent.”</i> Toronto: Canadian Institute of Jesuit Studies, 2004.</li>
				<li>Sharpe, Andrew, Jean-François Arsenault, Simon Lapointe and Fraser Cowan. <i class="citetitle">The Effect of Increasing Aboriginal Educational Attainment on the Labour Force, Output and the Fiscal Imbalance.</i> Ottawa: Centre for the Study of Living Standards, 2009.</li>
				<li>Shea, Goldie. <i class="citetitle">Institutional Child Abuse in Canada: Criminal Cases</i>. Ottawa: Law Commission of Canada, 1999.</li>
				<li>Simpson, Leanne, and Kiera L. Ladner, editors. <i class="citetitle">This is an Honour Song: Twenty Years Since the Blockades, An Anthology of Writing on the Oka Crisis.</i> Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring, 2010.</li>
				<li>Simpson, Leanne. <i class="citetitle">Dancing on Our Turtle’s Back: Stories of Nishnaabeg Re-Creation, Resurgence and a New Emergence.</i> Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring Publishing, 2011.</li>
				<li>Sinha, Vandna, and Nico Trocmé, Barbara Fallon, Bruce MacLaurin, Elizabeth Fast, Shelley Thomas Prokop, et al. <i class="citetitle">Kiskisik Awasisak: Remember the Children: Understanding the Overrepresentation of First Nations Children in the Child Welfare System</i>. Ontario: Assembly of First Nations, 2011.</li>
				<li>Snow, John. <i class="citetitle">These Mountains are our Sacred Places: The Story of the Stoney Indians</i>. Toronto: Samuel Stevens, 1977.</li>
				<li>Sport Canada. “Canadian Sport Policy Renewal, Round Table on Sport and Aboriginal Peoples, Summary Report.” 15 July 2011. <a href="https://sirc.ca/sites/default/files/content/docs/pdf/aboriginal.pdf" >https://sirc.ca/sites/default/files/content/docs/pdf/aboriginal.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>Sprague, D. N. <i class="citetitle">Canada’s Treaties with Aboriginal People</i>. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba, Faculty of law, Canadian Legal History Project, 1991.</li>
				<li>Standing Bear, Luther. <i class="citetitle">My People the Sioux</i>, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1928.</li>
				<li>Stocken, H. W. Gibbon. <i class="citetitle">Among the Blackfoot and Sarcee</i>. Introduction by Georgeen Barrass. Calgary: Glenbow Museum, 1976.</li>
				<li>Sutherland, Neil. <i class="citetitle">Children in English-Canadian Society: Framing the Twentieth-Century Consensus</i>. Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2000.</li>
				<li>Tait, Caroline L. <i class="citetitle">Fetal Alcohol Syndrome among Aboriginal People in Canada: Review and Analysis of the Intergenerational Links to Residential Schools</i>. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2003.</li>
				<li>Tavuchis, Nicholas. <i class="citetitle">Mea Culpa: A Sociology of Apology and Reconciliation</i>. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1991.</li>
				<li>Treaty 7 Tribal Council, Walter Hildebrandt, Sarah Carter and Dorothy First Rider. <i class="citetitle">The True Spirit and Original Intent of Treaty 7.</i> Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queens University Press, 1996.</li>
				<li>Trudel, Marcel. <i class="citetitle">The Beginnings of New France: 1524–1663</i>. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1973.</li>
				<li>Usher, Jean. <i class="citetitle">William Duncan of Metlakatla: A Victorian Missionary in British Columbia</i>. Publications in History 9. Ottawa: National Museums of Canada, 1974.</li>
				<li>Vanderburgh, Rosamond M. <i class="citetitle">The Canadian Indian in Ontario’s School Texts: A study of Social Studies textbooks, Grade 1 through 8</i>. Port Credit, Ontario: University Women’s Club of Port Credit, Study Group on the Canadian Indian Eskimo, 1968.</li>
				<li>Venne, Sharon H., editor. <i class="citetitle">Indian Acts and Amendments 1868–1975, An Indexed Collection.</i> Saskatoon: University of Saskatchewan, Native Law Centre, 1981.</li>
				<li>Waldram, James B. <i class="citetitle">The Way of the Pipe: Aboriginal Spirituality and Symbolic Healing in Canadian Prisons</i>. Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press, 1997.</li>
				<li>Waldram, James, D. Ann Herring, and T. Kue Young. <i class="citetitle">Aboriginal Health in Canada: Historical, Cultural, and Epidemiological Perspectives</i>. Second edition. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2006.</li>
				<li>Weaver, Sally M. <i class="citetitle">Making Canadian Indian Policy: The Hidden Agenda, 1968–70</i>. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1981.</li>
				<li>Wherrett, George Jasper. <i class="citetitle">The Miracle of the Empty Beds: A History of Tuberculosis in Canada</i>. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977.</li>
				<li>Williams Jr., Robert A. <i class="citetitle">Savage Anxieties: The Invention of Western Civilization.</i> New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2012.</li>
				<li>Williams Jr., Robert A. <i class="citetitle">The American Indian in Western Legal Thought: The Discourses of Conquest.</i> New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.</li>
				<li>Wilson, Daniel, and David Macdonald. <i class="citetitle">The Income Gap Between Aboriginal Peoples and the Rest of Canada</i>. Ottawa: Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives, 2010.</li>
				<li>Wilson, E. F. <i class="citetitle">Missionary work among the Ojebway Indians.</i> London, 1886.</li>
				<li>Wood, Ellen Meiksins. <i class="citetitle">Empire of Capital.</i> New York: Verso Books, 2003.</li>
				<li>Wood, Ellen Meiksins. <i class="citetitle">The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View</i>. London: Verso Books, 2002.</li>
			</ul>

			
			<h4>2. Book Chapters and Articles</h4>
			<ul class="bibliolist">
				<li>Adams, Ian. “The Indians: An Abandoned and Dispossessed People.” <i class="citetitle">Weekend Magazine</i> 15, no. 31 (31 July 1965).</li>
				<li>Alfred, Taiaiake, and Lana Lowe, “Warrior Societies in Contemporary Indigenous Communities.” Research paper for the Ipperwash Inquiry, 2007. <a href="http://www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/inquiries/ipperwash/policy_part/research/pdf/Alfred_and_Lowe.pdf" >http://www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/inquiries/ipperwash/policy_part/research/pdf/Alfred_and_Lowe.pdf</a> (accessed 22 February 2015).</li>
				<li>Anaya, S. James. “The Right of Indigenous Peoples to Self-Determination in the Post-Declaration Era.” In <i class="citetitle">Making the Declaration Work: The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples</i>, edited by Claire Charters and Rodolfo Stavenhagen, 184–198<i class="citetitle">.</i> Copenhagen: International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs, 2009.</li>
				<li>Atwood, Barbara. “The Voice of the Indian Child: Strengthening the Indian Child Welfare Act Through Children’s Participation.” <i class="citetitle">Arizona Law Review</i> 50, no.1 (2008): 127–156</li>
				<li>Banner, Stuart. “Why Terra Nullius? Anthropology and Property Law in Early Australia.” <i class="citetitle">Law and History Review 23</i>, no. 1 (Spring 2005): 95–132.</li>
				<li>Barron, F. Laurie. “The Indian Pass System in the Canadian West, 1882–1935.” <i class="citetitle">Prairie Forum</i> 13, no. 1 (Spring 1988): 25–42.</li>
				<li>Blondin-Andrew, Ethel. “New Ways of Looking for Leadership.” In <i class="citetitle">Leading in an Upside-Down World: New Canadian Perspectives on Leadership</i>, edited by J. Patrick Boyer, 59–70. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 2003.</li>
				<li>Boler, Megan, and Michalinos Zembylas. “Discomforting Truths: The Emotional Terrain of Understanding Difference.” In <i class="citetitle">Pedagogies of Difference: Rethinking Education for Social Change</i>, edited by Peter Pericles Trifonas, 110–136. New York: Routledge Falmer, 2003.</li>
				<li>Bolton, Stephanie. “Museums Taken to Task: Representing First Peoples at the McCord Museum of Canadian History.” In <i class="citetitle">First Nations, First Thoughts: The Impact of Indigenous Thought in Canada</i>, edited by Annis May Timpson, 145–169. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2009.</li>
				<li>Bonta, J., Carol LaPrairie, and S. Wallace-Capretta. “Risk Prediction and Re-offending: Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Offenders.” <i class="citetitle">Canadian Journal of Criminology</i> 39, no. 2 (1997): 127–144.</li>
				<li>Borrows, John. “Wampum at Niagara: The Royal Proclamation, Canadian Legal History, and Self-Government.” In <i class="citetitle">Aboriginal and Treaty Rights in Canada: Essays on Law, Equality and Respect for Difference</i>, edited by Michael Asch, 155–172. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1997.</li>
				<li>Bougie, Evelyne, and Sacha Senecal. “Registered Indian Children’s School Success and Intergenerational Effects of Residential Schooling in Canada.” <i class="citetitle">International Indigenous Policy Journal</i> 1, no. 1 (2010). <a href="http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/iipj/vol1/iss1/5" >http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/iipj/vol1/iss1/5</a>.</li>
				<li>Boyer, Yvonne. “Aboriginal Health: A Constitutional Rights Analysis.” National Aboriginal Health Organization, Discussion Paper Series in Aboriginal Health: Legal Issues. No. 1. Saskatoon: Native Law Centre. Ottawa: National Aboriginal Health Organization. 2003.</li>
				<li>Brown, Judith. “Economic Organization and the Position of Women among the Iroquois.” <i class="citetitle">Ethnohistory</i> 17 (1970): 151–167.</li>
				<li>Buchanan, Rachel. “Decolonizing the Archives: The Work of New Zealand’s Waitangi Tribunal.” <i class="citetitle">Public History Review</i> 14 (2007): 44–63.</li>
				<li>Bush, Peter. “How Have the Churches Lived Out Their Apologies.” Research report prepared for Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 2012.</li>
				<li>Campbell, Sue. “Remembering for the Future: Memory as a Lens on the Indian Residential School Truth and Reconciliation Commission.” Discussion paper prepared for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, April 2008.</li>
				<li>Canadian Medical Association. “Aboriginal health programming under siege, critics charge.” <i class="citetitle">Canadian Medical Association Journal</i> 184, no. 14 (2012).</li>
				<li>Carney, Robert. “The Grey Nuns and the Children of Holy Angels: Fort Chipewyan, 1874–1924.” In <i class="citetitle">Proceedings of the Fort Chipewyan and Fort Vermilion Bicentennial Conference</i>, edited by P. A. McCormack and R. Geoffrey Ironside. Edmonton: Boreal Institute for Northern Studies, University of Alberta, 1990.</li>
				<li>Castellano, Marlene Brant, Linda Archibald, and Mike DeGagné. “Introduction: Aboriginal Truths in the Narrative of Canada.” In <i class="citetitle">From Truth to Reconciliation: Transforming the Legacy of Residential Schools</i>, edited by Marlene Brant Castellano, Linda Archibald, and Mike DeGagne, 1–8. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2008.</li>
				<li>Chartrand, Larry N. “Métis Residential School Participation: A Literature Review.” In <i class="citetitle">Métis History and Experience and Residential Schools in Canada</i>, by Larry N. Chartrand, Tricia E. Logan, and Judy D. Daniels, 5–55. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2006.</li>
				<li>Clark, Penney. “Representations of Aboriginal People in English Canadian History Textbooks: Toward Reconciliation.” In <i class="citetitle">Teaching the Violent Past: History Education and Reconciliation</i>, edited by Elizabeth A. Cole, 81–120<i class="citetitle">.</i> Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield, 2007.</li>
				<li>Cook, Terry. “Evidence, memory, identity, and community: four shifting archival paradigms.” <i class="citetitle">Archival Science: International Journal on Recorded Information</i> 13, nos. 2–3 (2013): 95–120.</li>
				<li>Corntassel, Jeff, et al., “Indigenous story-telling, truth-telling and community approaches to reconciliation.” <i class="citetitle">ESC: English Studies in Canada</i> 35, no. 1 (2009): 137–159.</li>
				<li>Côté, M. M. “<i class="citetitle">St. Albert, Cradle of the Catholic Church in Alberta</i>.” <i class="citetitle">Canadian Catholic Historical Association Report</i> 32 (1965): 29–35.</li>
				<li>Cradock, Gerald. “Extraordinary Costs and Jurisdictional Disputes.” In <i class="citetitle">Wen: De: We are Coming to the Light of Day</i>, 178–207. Ottawa: First Nations Child and Family Caring Society of Canada, 2005.</li>
				<li>Crutcher, Nicole, and Shelley Trevethan. “An Examination of Healing Lodges for Aboriginal Offenders in Canada.” <i class="citetitle">Forum on Corrections Research</i> 14, no. 3 (2002): 52–54.</li>
				<li>Cuthand, Stan. “The Native Peoples of the Prairie Provinces in the 1920s and 1930s.” In <i class="citetitle">Sweet Promises: A Reader on Indian-White Relations in Canada</i>, edited by J. R. Miller, 381–392. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1991.</li>
				<li>de Greiff, Pablo. “The Role of Apologies in National Reconciliation Processes: On Making Trustworthy Institutions Trustworthy.” In <i class="citetitle">The Age of Apology: Facing Up to the Past</i>, edited by Mark Gibney, Rhoda E. Howard-Hassmann, Jean-Marc Coicaud, and Niklaus Steiner, 120–136. Phila- delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.</li>
				<li>Driver, Felix. “Discipline Without Frontiers? Representations of the Mettray Reformatory Colony in Britain, 1840–1880.” <i class="citetitle">Journal of Historical Sociology</i> 3 (September 1990): 272–93.</li>
				<li>Dumont, Alf, and Roger Hutchinson. “United Church Mission Goals and First Nations Peoples,” in <i class="citetitle">The United Church of Canada: A History</i>, edited by Don Schweitzer, 221–238. Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier University Press, 2011.</li>
				<li>Elias, Lillian. “Lillian Elias.” In <i class="citetitle">We Were So Far Away: The Inuit Experience of Residential Schools</i>, 47–62. Ottawa: Legacy of Hope, 2010.</li>
				<li>Erickson, Lesley. “‘Bury Our Sorrows in the Sacred Heart’: Gender and the Métis Response to Colonialism—the Case of Sara and Louis Riel, 1848–83.” In <i class="citetitle">Unsettled Pasts: Reconceiving the West through Women’s History</i>, edited by Sarah Carter, Lesley Erickson, Patricia Roome, and Char Smith, 17–46. Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Fingard, Judith. “The New England Company and the New Brunswick Indians, 1786–1826: A Comment on Colonial Perversion British Benevolence.” <i class="citetitle">Acadiensis</i> 1, no. 2 (Spring 1972): 29–42.</li>
				<li>First Nations Education Council. “Paper on First Nations Education Funding.” Wendake, Quebec: First Nations Education Council, 2009.</li>
				<li>Fiske, Jo-Anne. “Fishing Is Women’s Business: Changing Economic Roles of Carrier Women and Men.” In <i class="citetitle">Native Peoples, Native Lands: Canadian Indians, Inuit and Metis</i>, edited by Bruce Cox, 186–198. Ottawa: Carleton University Press, 1987.</li>
				<li>Fletcher, Matthew. “The Origins of the Indian Child Welfare Act: A Survey of the Legislative History.” Michigan State University College of Law, Indigenous Law and Policy Center Occasional Paper 2009-04. 10 April 2009.</li>
				<li>Friesen, Jean. “Magnificent Gifts: The Treaties of Canada with the Indians of the Northwest 1869– 1876.” In <i class="citetitle">The Spirit of the Alberta Indian Treaties</i>, edited by Richard T. Price, 203–13. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1999.</li>
				<li>Garneau, David. “Imaginary Spaces of Conciliation and Reconciliation.” <i class="citetitle">West Coast Line</i> 74 (Summer 2012): 28–38.</li>
				<li>Grant, John W. “Two-Thirds of the Revenue: Presbyterian Women and Native Indian Missions.” In <i class="citetitle">Changing Roles of Women within the Christian Church in Canada</i>, edited by E. G. Muir and M. F. Whiteley, 99–116. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1995.</li>
				<li>Gresko, Jacqueline. “Everyday Life at Qu’Appelle Industrial School.” In <i class="citetitle">Western Oblate Studies 2</i>, edited by Raymond Huel, 71–94. Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellon Press, 1992.</li>
				<li>Hare, Jan, and Barman, Jean. “Good Intentions Gone Awry: From Protection to Confinement in Emma Crosby’s Home for Aboriginal Girls.” In <i class="citetitle">With Good Intentions: EuroCanadian and Aboriginal Relations in Colonial Canada</i>, edited by D. Nock and C. Haig-Brown, 179–198. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2006.</li>
				<li>Harris, Verne, “The Archival Sliver: Power, Memory, and Archives in South Africa.” <i class="citetitle">Archival Science</i> 2, nos. 1–2 (2002): 63–86.</li>
				<li>Hepburn, D. W. “Northern Education: Facade for Failure.” <i class="citetitle">Variables: The Journal of the Sociology Club</i> (University of Alberta) 2, no. 1 (February 1963): 16–21.</li>
				<li>Immordino-Yang, M.H., and Antonio Damasio. “We feel, therefore we learn: The relevance of affective and social neuroscience to education.” <i class="citetitle">Mind, Brain, and Education</i> 1 (2007): 3–10.</li>
				<li>Jaenen, Cornelius J. “Education for Francization: The Case of New France in the Seventeenth Century.” In <i class="citetitle">Indian Education in Canada. Volume 1, The Legacy</i>, edited by Jean Barman, Yvonne Hebert, and Don McCaskill, 45–63. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1986.</li>
				<li>James, Matt. “Wrestling with the Past: Apologies, Quasi-Apologies, and Non-Apologies in Canada.” In <i class="citetitle">The Age of Apology: Facing Up to the Past</i>, edited by Mark Gibney, Rhoda E. Howard-Hassmann, Jean-Marc Coicaud, and Niklaus Steiner, 137–153. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2008.</li>
				<li>Jimerson, Randall C. “Archives for All: Professional Responsibility and Social Justice.” <i class="citetitle">American Archivist</i> 70 (2007): 252–281.</li>
				<li>Johns, Robert. “A History of St Peter’s Mission and of Education in Hay River, NWT Prior to 1950.” <i class="citetitle">Musk Ox</i> 13 (1973): 22–32.</li>
				<li>Johnston, Darlene. “Aboriginal Traditions of Tolerance and Reparation: Introducing Canadian Colonialism.” In <i class="citetitle">Le Devoir de Memoire et les Politiques du Pardon</i>, edited by Micheline Labelle, Rachad Antoinius, and Georges Leroux, 141–159. Quebec: Presses de l’Universite de Quebec, 2005.</li>
				<li>Kelly, Fred. “Confession of a Born Again Pagan.” In <i class="citetitle">From Truth to Reconciliation: Transforming the Legacy of Residential Schools</i>, edited by Marlene Brant Castellano, Linda Archibald and Mike DeGagne, 13–40. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2008.</li>
				<li>Kelm, Mary-Ellen. “Introduction.” In <i class="citetitle">The Letters of Margaret Butcher: Missionary-Imperialism on the North Pacific Coast</i>, by Margaret Butcher, xi–xxxi. Edited by Mary-Ellen Kelm. Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2006.</li>
				<li>Klein, Laura. “Mother as Clanswoman: Rank and Gender in Tlingit Society.” In <i class="citetitle">Women and Power in Native North America</i>, edited by Laura Klein and Lillian Ackerman, 28–45. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995</li>
				<li>Krech, Shepard, III. “Nutritional Evaluation of a Mission Residential School Diet: The Accuracy of Informant Recall.” <i class="citetitle">Human Organization</i> 37 (1978): 186–190.</li>
				<li>Kulchyski, Peter. “‘A Considerable Unrest’: F. O. Loft and the League of Indians.” <i class="citetitle">Native Studies Review</i> 4, nos. 1–2 (1988): 95–117.</li>
				<li>Lleweyn, Jennifer. “Dealing with the Legacy of Native Residential School Abuse in Canada: Litigation, ADR and Restorative Justice.” <i class="citetitle">University of Toronto Law Journal</i> 52 (2002): 253–300.</li>
				<li>MacKenzie, Ian. “For Everything There is a Season.” In <i class="citetitle">Response, Responsibility, and Renewal: Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Journey</i>, edited by Gregory Younging, Jonathan Dewar, and Mike DeGagne, 87–96. Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2009.</li>
				<li>Mandryk, Murray. “Uneasy Neighbours: White-Aboriginal relations and agricultural decline.” In <i class="citetitle">Writing Off the Rural West: Globalization, Governments and the Transformation of Rural Communities</i>, edited by Roger Epp and Dave Whitson, 205–221. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press with the Parkland Institute, 2001.</li>
				<li>Sison, Marites N. “Primate’s Commission begins work.” <i class="citetitle">Anglican Journal</i>, 2 May 2014. <a href="http://www.anglicanjournal.com/articles/primate-s-commission-begins-work" >http://www.anglicanjournal.com/articles/primate-s-commission-begins-work</a>.</li>
				<li>Mason, Courtney, and Joshua Koehli. “Barriers to Physical Activity for Aboriginal Youth: Implications for Community Health, Policy and Culture.” <i class="citetitle">Pimatisiwin: A Journal of Aboriginal and Indigenous Community Health</i> 10, no. 1 (2012): 97–107.</li>
				<li>McCue, Harvey. “First Nations 2nd and 3rd Level Education Services: A Discussion Paper for the Joint Working Group INAC-AFN.” 2006. <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education/9._2006_april_harvey_mccue_first_nations_2nd_&amp;_3rd_level_services_paper.pdf" >http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education/9._2006_april_harvey_mccue_first_nations_2nd_&amp;_3rd_level_services_paper.pdf</a>.</li>
				<li>McKay, Stan. “Expanding the Dialogue on Truth and Reconciliation—In a good way.” In <i class="citetitle">From Truth to Reconciliation: Transforming the Legacy of Residential Schools</i>, edited by Marlene Brant Castellano, Linda Archibald and Mike DeGagne, 103–115<i class="citetitle">.</i> Ottawa: Aboriginal Healing Foundation, 2008.</li>
				<li>McKenzie, Brad, and Pete Hudson. “Native Children, Child Welfare, and the Colonization of Native People.” In <i class="citetitle">The Challenge of Child Welfare</i>, edited by Ken Levitt and Brian Wharf, 125–141. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1985.</li>
				<li>Miller, John. “Ipperwash and the Media: A critical analysis of how the story was covered.” Report prepared for Aboriginal Legal Services of Toronto, October 2005. <a href="http://www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/inquiries/ipperwash/policy_part/projects/pdf/ALST_Ipperwash_and_media.pdf" >http://www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/inquiries/ipperwash/policy_part/projects/pdf/ALST_Ipperwash_and_media.pdf</a> (accessed 28 February 2015).</li>
				<li>Morse, Bradford W. “Indigenous human rights and knowledge in archives, museums and libraries: Some International Perspectives with specific reference to New Zealand and Canada.” <i class="citetitle">Archival Science</i> 12, no. 2 (2012): 113–140.</li>
				<li>Nielson, Marianne O. “Canadian Aboriginal Healing Lodges: A Model for the United States?” <i class="citetitle">Prison Journal</i> 83, no. 1 (March 2003): 67–89.</li>
				<li>Penny, Chris. “Formal Educational Attainment of Inuit in Canada, 1981–2006.” In <i class="citetitle">Aboriginal Education: Current Crisis and Future Alternatives</i>, edited by Jerry P. White, et. al., 33–47. Toronto: Thompson Educational Publishing, 2009.</li>
				<li>Perry, Adele. “Metropolitan Knowledge, Colonial Practice, and Indigenous Womenhood.” In <i class="citetitle">Contact Zones: Aboriginal and Settler Women in Canada’s Colonial Past</i>, edited by Myra Rutherdale and Katie Pickles. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Qwul’sih’yah’maht (Robina Anne Thomas). “Honouring the Oral Traditions of My Ancestors through Storytelling.” In <i class="citetitle">Research as Resistance: Critical, Indigenous, and Anti-Oppressive Approaches</i>, edited by Leslie Brown and Susan Strega, 237–254<i class="citetitle">.</i> Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press/Women’s Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Reid, Jennifer. “The Roman Catholic Foundations of Land Claims in Canada.” <i class="citetitle">Historical Papers 2009: Canadian Society of Church History</i> (2009): 5–19. <a href="http://pi.library.yorku.ca/ojs/index.php/historicalpapers/article/viewFile/39133/35490" >http://pi.library.yorku.ca/ojs/index.php/historicalpapers/article/viewFile/39133/35490</a>.</li>
				<li>Renaud, André. “Indian education today.” <i class="citetitle">Anthropologica</i> (1958): 1–49.</li>
				<li>Robertson, Kirsty. “Threads of Hope: The Living Healing Quilt Project,” <i class="citetitle">ESC: English Studies in Canada</i> 35, no. 1 (March 2009): 85–107.</li>
				<li>Ruben, Abraham. “Abraham Ruben.” In <i class="citetitle">We Were So Far Away: The Inuit Experience of Residential Schools</i>, edited by Heather L. Igloliorte. Ottawa: Legacy of Hope Foundation, 2010.</li>
				<li>Ruiz-Casares, M., et al. “Supervisory neglect and risk of harm. Evidence from the Canadian Child Welfare System.” <i class="citetitle">Child Abuse and Neglect</i> 36, no. 6 (2012): 471–480.</li>
				<li>Sadowski, Edward G. “Preliminary report on the investigation into missing school files for the Shingwauk Indian Residential School.” Algoma University College, Shingwauk Project Archives, November 2006.</li>
				<li>Schonert-Reichl, K. A., and S. Hymel. “Educating the heart as well as the mind: Social and emotional learning for school and life success.” <i class="citetitle">Education Canada</i> 47, 2 (2007): 20–25.</li>
				<li>Sheppard, Maia G. “Creating a Caring Classroom in which to Teach Difficult Histories.” <i class="citetitle">The History Teacher</i> 43, no. 3 (May 2010): 411–426.</li>
				<li>Simon, Roger. “Towards a Hopeful Practice of Worrying: The Problematics of Listening and the Educative Responsibilities of Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission.” In <i class="citetitle">Reconciling Canada: Critical Perspectives on the Culture of Redress</i>, edited by Jennifer Henderson and Pauline Wakeham, 129–142. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2013.</li>
				<li>Sinha, V., and A. Kozlowski. “The Structure of Aboriginal Child Welfare in Canada.” <i class="citetitle">International Indigenous Policy Journal</i> 4 no. 2 (2013): article 2. <a href="http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/iipj/vol4/iss2/2" >http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/iipj/vol4/iss2/2</a>.</li>
				<li>Sluman, Norma. “The Text Book Indian.” <i class="citetitle">Toronto Education Quarterly</i> 5, no. 3 (1967).</li>
				<li>Smylie, J. “A Review of Aboriginal Infant Mortality Rates in Canada: Striking and Persistent Aboriginal/Non-Aboriginal Inequities.” <i class="citetitle">Canadian Journal of Public Health</i> 101 no. 2 (2010): 143–148.</li>
				<li>Stanley, George F. G. “Alberta’s Half-Breed Reserve Saint-Paul-des Métis, 1896–1909.” In <i class="citetitle">The Other Natives: The Metis, vol. 2</i>, edited by A. S. Lussier and D. B. Sealey, 75–107. Winnipeg: Manitoba Metis Federation Press, 1978.</li>
				<li>Stanton, Kim. “Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission: Settling the Past?” <i class="citetitle">International Indigenous Policy Journal</i> 2, issue 3 (2011): 1–18. <a href="http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1034&amp;context=iipj" >http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1034&amp;context=iipj</a>.</li>
				<li>Stevenson, Winona. “The Red River Indian Mission School and John West’s ‘Little Charges’ 1820–1833.” <i class="citetitle">Native Studies Review</i> 4, nos. 1–2 (1988): 129–65.</li>
				<li>Stonechild, Blair. “The Indian View of the 1885 Uprising.” In <i class="citetitle">Sweet Promises: A reader on Indian-White Relations in Canada</i>, edited by J. R. Miller, 259–76. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1991.</li>
				<li>Taylor, J. Garth. “Northern Algonquians on the Frontiers of ‘New Ontario,’ 1890–1945.” In <i class="citetitle">Aboriginal Ontario: Historical Perspectives on the First Nations</i>, edited by Edward S. Rogers and Donald B. Smith. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1994.</li>
				<li>Taylor, John Leonard. “Canada’s Northwest Indian Policy in the 1870s: Traditional Premises and Necessary Innovations.” In <i class="citetitle">The Spirit of the Alberta Indian Treaties,</i> edited by Richard T. Price, 3–7. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1999.</li>
				<li>Te Hiwi, Braden P. “‘What is the Spirit of this Gathering?’ Indigenous Sport Policy-Makers and Self-Determination in Canada.” <i class="citetitle">International Indigenous Policy Journal</i> 5, issue 4 (October 2014): 1–16.</li>
				<li>Thomas, Robina Anne (Qwul’sih’yah’maht). “Honouring the Oral Traditions of My Ancestors through Storytelling.” In <i class="citetitle">Research as Resistance: Critical, Indigenous, and Anti-Oppressive Approaches</i>, edited by Leslie Brown and Susan Strega, 237–54<i class="citetitle">.</i> Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press/ Women’s Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Tobias, John L. “Protection, Civilization, Assimilation: An Outline History of Canada’s Indian Policy.” In <i class="citetitle">Sweet Promises: A Reader on Indian-White Relations in Canada</i>, edited by J. R. Miller. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1991.</li>
				<li>Upton, L. F. S. “The Origins of Canadian Indian Policy.” <i class="citetitle">Journal of Canadian Studies</i> 8, no. 4 (November 1973): 51–60.</li>
				<li>Valaskakis, Gail Guthrie. “Rights and Warriors: Media Memories and Oka.” In <i class="citetitle">Indian Country: Essays on Contemporary Native Culture</i>, edited by Gail Guthrie Valaskakis, 35–65. Waterloo: Wilfred Laurier University Press, 2005.</li>
				<li>Van Camp, Rosa. “Bishop Paul Piché.” <i class="citetitle">Arctic Profiles</i> 42, no. 2 (1989): 168–170.</li>
				<li>van Erven, Eugene, and Kate Gardner. “Performing Cross-Cultural Conversations: Creating New Kinships through Community Theatre.” In <i class="citetitle">Acting Together: Performance and the Creative Transformation of Conflict. Vol. 2: Building Just and Inclusive Communities</i>, edited by Cynthia E. Cohen, Roberto Gutierrez Varea, and Polly O. Walker, 9–41. Oakland, California: New Village Press, 2011.</li>
				<li>Wien, Fred, Cindy Blackstock, John Loxley, and Nico Trocmè. “Keeping First Nations Children at Home: A Few Federal Policy Changes could make a Big Difference.” <i class="citetitle">First Peoples Child and Family Review</i> 3, no. 1 (2007): 10–14.</li>
				<li>Wilk, Piotr, Jerry P. White, and Éric Guimond. “Métis Educational Attainment.” In <i class="citetitle">Aboriginal Education: Current Crisis and Future Alternatives,</i> edited by Jerry P. White, et al., 49–67. Toronto: Thompson Educational Publishing, 2009.</li>
				<li>Wilson, Ian E. “Peace, Order and Good Government: Archives in Society.” <i class="citetitle">Archival Science: International Journal on Recorded Information</i> 12, issue 2 (2012): 235–244.</li>
				<li>Wolfe, Patrick. “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native.” <i class="citetitle">Journal of Genocide Research</i> 8, no. 4 (2006): 387–409.</li>
			</ul>

			<h4>3. Newspapers and Broadcast Media</h4>
			<ul class="bibliolist">
				<li>Aboriginal Peoples’ Television Network. “Cree Community Bans FNs Spirituality.” 17 January 2011. <a href="http://aptn.ca/news/2011/01/17/crees-ban-sweat-lodges-fns-spirituality-from-community/" >http://aptn.ca/news/2011/01/17/crees-ban-sweat-lodges-fns-spirituality-from-community/</a>.</li>
				<li>Adams, Ian. “The Lonely Death of Charlie Wenjack.” <i class="citetitle">Maclean’s</i> (February 1967): 30–44.</li>
				<li>BasicNews.ca. “Two-Row Wampum Centers Idle No More Toronto Rally, Not the Royal Proclamation.” 9 October 2013. <a href="http://basicsnews.ca/2013/10/two-row-wampum-centers-idle-no-more-toronto-rally-not-the-royal-proclamation/" >http://basicsnews.ca/2013/10/two-row-wampum-centers-idle-no-more-toronto-rally-not-the-royal-proclamation/</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Brantford Expositor</i>. “Damages for Plaintiff in Miller vs. Ashton Case.” 1 April 1914.</li>
				<li>Brean, Joseph. “‘Reconciliation’ with First Nations, Not the Charter of Rights &amp; Freedoms, Will Define the Supreme Court in Coming years, Chief Justice Says.” <i class="citetitle">National Post</i>, 13 March 2014. <a href="http://news.nationalpost.com/2014/03/13/reconciliation-with-first-nations-not-the-charter-of-rights-freedoms-will-define-the-supreme-court-in-coming-years-chief-justice-says/" >http://news.nationalpost.com/2014/03/13/reconciliation-with-first-nations-not-the-charter-of-rights-freedoms-will-define-the-supreme-court-in-coming-years-chief-justice-says/</a></li>
				<li>Brent Jang. “Gas Exports from B.C. Seen as Key to Reviving Pipeline. <i class="citetitle">Globe and Mail,</i> 2 February 2014. <a href="http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/energy-and-resources/gas-exports-from-bc-said-key-to-reviving-pipeline/article16657138/" >http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/energy-and-resources/gas-exports-from-bc-said-key-to-reviving-pipeline/article16657138/</a></li>
				<li>CBC News, Manitoba. “Teacher Seeks Healing Through Truth Commission.” 18 June 2010. http:// <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/story/2010/06/18/mb-truth-reconciliation-healing-teachers-winnipeg.html" >www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/story/2010/06/18/mb-truth-reconciliation-healing-teachers-winnipeg.html</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “6 Landmark Rulings on Native Rights.” 8 January 2013. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/6-landmark-rulings-on-native-rights-1.1316961" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/6-landmark-rulings-on-native-rights-1.1316961</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Civilization Museum Now the Canadian Museum of History.” 12 December 2013. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/civilization-museum-now-the-canadian-museum-of-history-1.2461738" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/civilization-museum-now-the-canadian-museum-of-history-1.2461738</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Ex-residential school worker convicted of abusing boys.” 5 November 2013. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/ex-residential-school-worker-convicted-of-abusing-boys-1.2415810" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/ex-residential-school-worker-convicted-of-abusing-boys-1.2415810</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Murdered and Missing Aboriginal Women Deserve Inquiry, Rights Group Says.” 12 January 2015. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/murdered-and-missing-aboriginal-women-deserve-inquiry-rights-group-says-1.2897707" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/murdered-and-missing-aboriginal-women-deserve-inquiry-rights-group-says-1.2897707</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Nun guilty in residential school assaults.” 28 December 1998. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nun-guilty-in-residential-school-assaults-1.166827" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nun-guilty-in-residential-school-assaults-1.166827</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Paul Leroux gets 3 years for residential school abuse.” 12 December 2013. http:// <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatoon/paul-leroux-gets-3-years-for-residential-school-abuse-1.2461629" >www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatoon/paul-leroux-gets-3-years-for-residential-school-abuse-1.2461629</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Pope Expresses ‘Sorrow’ for Abuse at Residential Schools.” 29 April 2009. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/pope-expresses-sorrow-for-abuse-at-residential-schools-1.778019" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/pope-expresses-sorrow-for-abuse-at-residential-schools-1.778019</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Residential School Day Scholars Launch Class-action Lawsuit.” 16 August 2012. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/residential-school-day-scholars-launch-class-action-lawsuit-1.1146607" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/residential-school-day-scholars-launch-class-action-lawsuit-1.1146607</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Sixties Scoop Case Moves Forward as Class-action Lawsuit.” 3 December 2014. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/sixties-scoop-case-moves-forward-as-class-action-lawsuit-1.2859332" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/sixties-scoop-case-moves-forward-as-class-action-lawsuit-1.2859332</a>.</li>
				<li>CBC News. “Women’s Memorial March in Vancouver Attracts Hundreds.” 14 February 2015. http:// <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/womens-memorial-march-in-vancouver-attracts-hundreds-1.2957930" >www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/womens-memorial-march-in-vancouver-attracts-hundreds-1.2957930</a>.</li>
				<li>Coates, Ken S. “Aboriginal Women Deserve Much More than an Inquiry.” <i class="citetitle">National Post</i>, 16 February 2015. <a href="http://news.nationalpost.com/2015/02/16/ken-s-coates-aboriginal-women-deserve-much-more-than-an-inquiry/" >http://news.nationalpost.com/2015/02/16/ken-s-coates-aboriginal-women-deserve-much-more-than-an-inquiry/</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Daily News</i> (Halifax). “Bernard’s Lawsuit helped natives nationwide.” 30 December 2007. <a href="http://www.canada.com/story_print.html?id=983a8b88-a8ac-4e09-9e5c-b2c0e207ac3d" >http://www.canada.com/story_print.html?id=983a8b88-a8ac-4e09-9e5c-b2c0e207ac3d</a>.</li>
				<li>Edmiston, Jake. “Indian Residential Schools or Settler Colonial Genocide? Native Group Slams Human Rights Museum Over Exhibit Wording.” <i class="citetitle">National Post</i>, 8 June 2013. <a href="http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/indian-residential-schools-or-settler-colonial-genocide" >http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/indian-residential-schools-or-settler-colonial-genocide</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Edmonton Journal</i>. “Deaths of Alberta Aboriginal Children in Care no ‘Fluke of Statistics.’” 8 January 2014. <a href="http://www.edmontonjournal.com/life/Deaths+Alberta+aboriginal+children+care+fluke+statistics/9212384/story.html" >http://www.edmontonjournal.com/life/Deaths+Alberta+aboriginal+children+care+fluke+statistics/9212384/story.html</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Edmonton Journal</i>. “Demolition of former residential school called for to put bad memories to rest.” 13 August 1998.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Edmonton Journal.</i> “Indians will operate Blue Quills School.” 1 August 1970.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Edmonton Journal.</i> “Nun forced native students to eat their own vomit.” 25 June 1999.</li>
				<li>Edwards, Peter. “‘This is about reuniting a family, even in death.’” <i class="citetitle">Toronto Star</i>, 4 March 2011. <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/04/this_is_about_reuniting_a_family_even_in_death.html" >http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/04/this_is_about_reuniting_a_family_even_in_death.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Edwards, Peter. “Star gets action: Charlie Hunter headed home.” <i class="citetitle">Toronto Star</i>, 24 March 2011. <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/24/star_gets_action_charlie_hunter_headed_home.html" >http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/24/star_gets_action_charlie_hunter_headed_home.html</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Gazette: Law Society of Upper Canada.</i> “Law Society Throws Support Behind Reconciliation Initiatives.” 11 December 2014. <a href="http://www.lawsocietygazette.ca/news/law-society-throws-support-behind-reconciliation-initiatives/" >http://www.lawsocietygazette.ca/news/law-society-throws-support-behind-reconciliation-initiatives/</a>.</li>
				<li>Gleeson, Richard. “Four years for sex assault.” Northern News Services, 8 August 1997. <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-08/aug8_97jail.html" >http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-08/aug8_97jail.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Hale, Alan S. “Treaty 3 Holds Commemoration Ceremony for Survivors of District Residential School System.” <i class="citetitle">Kenora Daily Miner and News</i>, 25 March 2014.</li>
				<li>Hunter, Carrie. “Education Centre set to re-open.” <i class="citetitle">Prince Albert Herald</i>, 15 October 1997.</li>
				<li>Indian Country Today Media Network. “Christian Crees Tear Down Sweat Lodge.” 7 February 2011. <a href="http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2011/02/07/christian-crees-tear-down-sweat-lodge-15500" >http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2011/02/07/christian-crees-tear-down-sweat-lodge-15500</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Kenora Miner and News.</i> “2 boys died from exposure.” 18 December 1970.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Kenora Miner and News.</i> “Inquest hears tragic tale of runaway boy.” 18 November 1966.</li>
				<li>Kinew, Wab. “It’s the Same Great Spirit.” <i class="citetitle">Winnipeg Free Press</i>, 22 October 2012. <a href="http://www.winnipegfreepress.com/local/its-the-same" >http://www.winnipegfreepress.com/local/its-the-same</a>—great-spirit-175193351.html.</li>
				<li>LaRose, Stephen. “Wrecker’s ball claims White Calf Collegiate.” <i class="citetitle">Saskatchewan Sage</i> 3, issue 8 (1999). <a href="http://www.ammsa.com/publications/saskatchewan-sage/wreckers-ball-claims-white-calf-collegiate-0" >http://www.ammsa.com/publications/saskatchewan-sage/wreckers-ball-claims-white-calf-collegiate-0</a>.</li>
				<li>Lavoie, Judith. “Paintings Bear Witness to Residential Schools’ Harsh Life.” <i class="citetitle">Victoria Times-Colonist,</i> 31 March 2013.</li>
				<li>Lee, Jeff. “Tsilhqot’in Nation Strikes Conciliatory Note with Municipalities.” <i class="citetitle">Vancouver Sun,</i> 24 September 2014.</li>
				<li>Lewis, Jeff. “Northwest Territories Eyes Revival of Mackenzie Valley Pipeline Project.” <i class="citetitle">Financial Post,</i> 11 June 2013. <a href="http://business.financialpost.com/2013/06/11/northwest-territories-eyes-revival-of-mackenzie-valley-pipeline-project/?__lsa=c5d4-608a" >http://business.financialpost.com/2013/06/11/northwest-territories-eyes-revival-of-mackenzie-valley-pipeline-project/?__lsa=c5d4-608a</a>.</li>
				<li>Lewis, Jeff. “TransCanada CEO Says Canada Needs to Resolve Conflicts over Pipelines.” <i class="citetitle">Globe and Mail</i>, 4 February 2015. <a href="http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/economy/transcanada-ceo-says-canada-needs-to-resolve-conflicts-over-pipelines/article22798276/" >http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/economy/transcanada-ceo-says-canada-needs-to-resolve-conflicts-over-pipelines/article22798276/</a>.</li>
				<li>MacDonald, Michael. “Shale Gas Conflict in New Brunswick Underscores Historical Grievances, Rights of First Nations.” <i class="citetitle">Toronto Star</i>, 25 December 2013. <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/12/25/shale_gas_conflict_in_new_brunswick_underscores_historic_grievances_rights_of_first_nations.html" >http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/12/25/shale_gas_conflict_in_new_brunswick_underscores_historic_grievances_rights_of_first_nations.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Mehta, Diana. “’Sixties Scoop’ Class-action Lawsuit to Proceed.” Canadian Press, 4 December 2014. <a href="http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/60s-scoop-class-action-lawsuit-to-proceed-1.2132317" >http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/60s-scoop-class-action-lawsuit-to-proceed-1.2132317</a>.</li>
				<li>Moore, Dene. “Federal Appeal Court Gives Ok on Hearing First Nations’ Day-school Suit.” Canadian Press, 4 March 2014. <a href="http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/federal-appeal-court-gives-ok-on-hearing-first-nations-day-school-suit-1.1713809" >http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/federal-appeal-court-gives-ok-on-hearing-first-nations-day-school-suit-1.1713809</a>.</li>
				<li>Ostrem, Dawn. “Back to court: Paul Leroux challenges convictions, sentence.” <i class="citetitle">Northern News Services</i>, 26 June 1997. <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2000-06/jun26_00back.html" >http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2000-06/jun26_00back.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Pigott, Catherine. “The Leadership Factory: Grandin College never turned out a priest or a nun, but it produced an elite North of 60.” <i class="citetitle">National Post</i>, 4 December 1999.</li>
				<li>Porter, Jody. “Remains Found Near Residential School Are ‘Non-human.’” CBC News, 12 July 2012. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunderbay/remains-found-near-residential-school-are-non-human-1.1249599" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunderbay/remains-found-near-residential-school-are-non-human-1.1249599</a>.</li>
				<li>Ratuski, Andrea. “Residential School Art Series Awarded to U of M.” CBC News, 24 September 2013. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/scene/residential-school-art-series-awarded-to-u-of-m-1.1865994" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/scene/residential-school-art-series-awarded-to-u-of-m-1.1865994</a>.</li>
				<li>Raven, Andrew. “Grollier Hall supervisor sentenced.” Northern News Services, 20 August 2004. <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2004-08/aug20_04crt.html" >http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2004-08/aug20_04crt.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Rees, Ann. “Priest’s victims admit sexual abuse.” <i class="citetitle">The Province</i> (Vancouver)<i class="citetitle">,</i> 19 July 1989.</li>
				<li>Rennie, Steve. “Idle No More Protestors Mark 25th Anniversary of Royal Proclamation.” Canadian Press, 7 October 2013. <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/10/07/idle_no_more_protesters_mark_250th_anniversary_of_royal_proclamation.html" >http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/10/07/idle_no_more_protesters_mark_250th_anniversary_of_royal_proclamation.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Salinas, Eva. “Four-year hunt ends in arrest.” <i class="citetitle">Globe and Mail</i>, 3 August 2006. <a href="http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/four-year-hunt-ends-in-arrest/article713735/" >http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/four-year-hunt-ends-in-arrest/article713735/</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Saskatoon Star-Phoenix.</i> “Former Students File Suit Over Sexual, Physical Abuse.” 26 November 1996.</li>
				<li>Schwartz, Daniel, and Mark Gollom. “NB Fracking Protests and the Fight for Aboriginal Rights.” CBC News, 19 October 2013. <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/n-b-fracking-protests-and-the-fight-for-aboriginal-rights-1.2126515" >http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/n-b-fracking-protests-and-the-fight-for-aboriginal-rights-1.2126515</a>.</li>
				<li>Steel, Debora. “Alberni Residential Students Reunited With Childhood Art.” <i class="citetitle">Ha-Shilth-Sa</i>, 2 April 2013. <a href="http://www.hashilthsa.com/news/2013-04-03/alberni-indian-residential-students-reunited-childhood-art" >http://www.hashilthsa.com/news/2013-04-03/alberni-indian-residential-students-reunited-childhood-art</a>.</li>
				<li>Struzik, Ed. “Priest’s sordid past shocks parish: Father Houston was declared dangerous sex offender, sent to prison in 1962.” <i class="citetitle">Edmonton Journal</i>, 6 June 2002.</li>
				<li>Taylor, Glenn. “Arrest in Grollier Hall sex case: Former boys supervisor faces 32 counts of sexual assault on his student.” Northern News Services, 16 June 1997. <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-06/jun16_97sex.html" >http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-06/jun16_97sex.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Taylor, Glenn. “Grollier man pleads not guilty to sex offences.” Northern News Services. 28 November 1997. <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-11/nov28_97sex.html" >http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-11/nov28_97sex.html</a>.</li>
				<li>Thompson, Roxanna. “Dehcho Hall to close its doors.” Northern News Services online, 26 January 2009. <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2009-01/jan26_09h.html" >http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2009-01/jan26_09h.html</a>.</li>
				<li>University of Manitoba. “Historic Agreement Signed on National Aboriginal Day.” 21 June 2013. <a href="http://umanitoba.ca/news/blogs/blog/2013/06/21/historic-agreement-signed-on-national-aboriginal-day/" >http://umanitoba.ca/news/blogs/blog/2013/06/21/historic-agreement-signed-on-national-aboriginal-day/</a>.</li>
				<li>University of Winnipeg. “UWinnipeg Healing Quilt Gifted to TRC Commissioners.” 17 June 2010. <a href="http://www.uwinnipeg.ca/index/uw-news-action/story.364/title.uwinnipeg-healing-quilt-gifted-to-trc-commissioners-" >http://www.uwinnipeg.ca/index/uw-news-action/story.364/title.uwinnipeg-healing-quilt-gifted-to-trc-commissioners-</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Vancouver Province</i>. “Historic Children’s Paintings on Display at the BC National Event Learning Centre.” 15 September 2013. <a href="http://www.theprovince.com/entertainment/Historic+children+paintings/8914210/story.html" >http://www.theprovince.com/entertainment/Historic+children+paintings/8914210/story.html</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Vancouver Sun</i>. “School sex assaults bring jail.” 4 October 1996.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Victoria Times–Colonist</i>. “Former employee of residential school jailed for sex abuses.” 24 January 2004.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Windspeaker</i>. “Man sentenced to five years for sexually assaulting Native girls.” Volume 12, Issue 20 (1995). <a href="http://www.ammsa.com/publications/windspeaker/man-sentenced-five-years-sexually-assaulting-native-girls" >http://www.ammsa.com/publications/windspeaker/man-sentenced-five-years-sexually-assaulting-native-girls</a>.</li>
				<li><i class="citetitle">Winnipeg Free Press</i>. “Find Body of Indian Girl, Long Missing.” 17 April 1930. <i class="citetitle">Winnipeg Free Press</i>. “Missing Birtle Girl Is Not Yet Found.” 28 March 1930.</li>
			</ul>


			<h4>4. Online Sources</h4>
			<ul class="bibliolist">
			<li>Amnesty International Canada, et al. “Canada uses World Conference to continue indefensible attack on UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.” 24 September 2014. <a href="http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/Joint_Public_Statement_re_Canada_attack_on_UNDRIP_Sept_24_2014.pdf" >http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/Joint_Public_Statement_re_Canada_attack_on_UNDRIP_Sept_24_2014.pdf</a> (accessed 17 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Anglican Church of Canada. “A Message to the Church Concerning the Primate’s Commission on Discovery, Reconciliation and Justice.” <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/primate/communications/commission-on-discovery-reconciliation-justice/" >http://www.anglican.ca/primate/communications/commission-on-discovery-reconciliation-justice/</a> (accessed 20 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Anglican Church of Canada. “A New Agape: Plan of Anglican work in support of a new partnership between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Anglicans.” <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/about/ccc/acip/a-new-agape/" >http://www.anglican.ca/about/ccc/acip/a-new-agape/</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Anglican Church of Canada. “Learning to call one another friends: The Primate’s Commission on Discovery, Justice and Reconciliation.” June 2014. <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/primate/files/2014/06/PCDRJ_June2014_Update.pdf" >http://www.anglican.ca/primate/files/2014/06/PCDRJ_June2014_Update.pdf</a> (acccessed 20 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Anglican Church of Canada. General Synod. “Bishop Horden Memorial School, Moose Factory Island, ON.” 2008. <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/histories/bishop-horden" >http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/histories/bishop-horden</a> (accessed 4 April 2015).</li>
			<li>Anglican Church of Canada. General Synod. “Resolution A086 R1: Repudiate the Doctrine of Discovery.” 2010. <a href="http://archive.anglican.ca/gs2010/resolutions/a086/" >http://archive.anglican.ca/gs2010/resolutions/a086/</a> (accessed 19 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Anglican Church of Canada. Mission and Justice Relationships. “Truth and Reconciliation.” <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/trc" >http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/trc</a>.</li>
			<li>Belcourt, Christi. Speech at dedication ceremony for the stained glass window on Parliament Hill. Ottawa, Ontario. 26 November 2012. <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370613921985/1370613942308" >https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370613921985/1370613942308</a>.</li>
			<li>Benedictine Sisters of Mount Angel. “About Us: A Brief History of the Benedictine Sisters of Mt. Angel.” <a href="http://www.benedictine-srs.org/history.html" >http://www.benedictine-srs.org/history.html</a> (accessed 12 June 2014).</li>
			<li>Canadian Catholic Aboriginal Council. “Mandate.” <a href="http://www.cccb.ca/site/eng/commissions-committees-and-aboriginal-council/aboriginal-council/canadian-catholic-aboriginal-council" >http://www.cccb.ca/site/eng/commissions-committees-and-aboriginal-council/aboriginal-council/canadian-catholic-aboriginal-council</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops. “Let Justice Flow Like a Mighty River: Brief to the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples.” 8 November 1993. <a href="http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/let_justice_flow_like_a_mighty_river.pdf" >http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/let_justice_flow_like_a_mighty_river.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Canadian Museum for Human Rights. President and CEO Stuart Murray. Speech delivered at “2017 Starts Now “ Forum. 3 May 2013. <a href="https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-cmhr-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-2017-starts-nowdebute" >https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-cmhr-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-2017-starts-nowdebute</a> (accessed 15 April 2015).</li>
			<li>Canadian Museum for Human Rights. President and CEO Stuart Murray. “Use of ‘Genocide’ in relation to treatment of Indigenous peoples in Canada.” 26 July 2013. <a href="http://museumforhumanrights.ca/about-museum/news/statement-president-and-ceo-use-genocide-relation-treatment-indigenous-peoples" >http://museumforhumanrights.ca/about-museum/news/statement-president-and-ceo-use-genocide-relation-treatment-indigenous-peoples.</a></li>
			<li>Canadian Museum for Human Rights. President and CEO Stuart Murray. Speech to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s National Research Centre Forum. Vancouver, BC. 3 March 2011. <a href="https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-truth-and-reconciliation" >https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-truth-and-reconciliation</a>.</li>
			<li>City of Vancouver. “Framework for City of Reconciliation.” Report from City Manager to Vancouver City Council, 18 September 2014. <a href="http://former.vancouver.ca/ctyclerk/cclerk/20141028/documents/rr1.pdf" >http://former.vancouver.ca/ctyclerk/cclerk/20141028/documents/rr1.pdf</a>.</li>
			<li>Fast, Vera K. “Amelia Le Sueur (Yeomans).” In <i class="citetitle">Dictionary of Canadian Biography</i> Online. <a href="http://www.biographi.ca/009004-119.01-e.php?BioId=41653" >http://www.biographi.ca/009004-119.01-e.php?BioId=41653</a> (accessed 26 May 2013).</li>
			<li>First Nations Summit. “Royal Proclamation still relevant on 250th Anniversary.” 2013. <a href="http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/FNS_Op-ed_re_250th_anniver_of_Royal_Proclamation_10_07_13.pdf" >http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/FNS_Op-ed_re_250th_anniver_of_Royal_Proclamation_10_07_13.pdf</a> (accessed 5 December 2014).</li>
			<li>Gresko, Jacqueline. “Paul Durieu.” In <i class="citetitle">Dictionary of Canadian Biography</i> Online. <a href="http://www.bio-graphi.ca/en/bio/durieu_paul_12E.html" >http://www.bio-graphi.ca/en/bio/durieu_paul_12E.html</a> (accessed 31 August 2014).</li>
			<li>Hiltz, Fred. “A Step Along the Path: Apology by Archbishop Fred Hiltz.” 6 August 1993. <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/files/2011/06/Apology-English.pdf" >http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/files/2011/06/Apology-English.pdf</a> (accessed 27 October 2014).</li>
			<li>Institute for Women’s and Gender Studies, University of Winnipeg. “TRC Quilting Project: Edu- cation and Art.” <a href="http://www.iwgs.ca/projects-a-publications/projects/118-healing-quilt-project-winter-2010" >http://www.iwgs.ca/projects-a-publications/projects/118-healing-quilt-project-winter-2010</a>.</li>
			<li>International Center for Transitional Justice. “Our Legacy, Our Hope” (video). 20 June 2012. <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xz2SUV0vFCI" >http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xz2SUV0vFCI</a>.</li>
			<li>International Center for Transitional Justice. “Youth Reporters Tell the Story of Residential Schools.” 18 November 2011. <a href="http://ictj.org/news/youth-reporters-tell-story-residential-schools" >http://ictj.org/news/youth-reporters-tell-story-residential-schools</a>.</li>
			<li>International Centre for Transitional Justice. “Canada TRC Youth Retreat” (video). <a href="http://vimeo.com/26397248" >http://vimeo.com/26397248</a> (accessed 2 March 2015).</li>
			<li>International Centre for Transitional Justice. “ICTJ Program Report: Children and Youth.” 2 August 2013. <a href="http://www.ictj.org/news/ictj-program-report-children-and-youth" >http://www.ictj.org/news/ictj-program-report-children-and-youth</a>.</li>
			<li>International Centre for Transitional Justice. “Strengthening Indigenous Rights through Truth Commissions: A Practitioner’s Resource.” 2012. <a href="https://www.ictj.org/sites/default/files/ICTJ-Truth-Seeking-Indigenous-Rights-2012-English.pdf" >https://www.ictj.org/sites/default/files/ICTJ-Truth-Seeking-Indigenous-Rights-2012-English.pdf</a>.</li>
			<li>International Coalition of Sites of Conscience. <a href="http://www.sitesofconscience.org/" >http://www.sitesofconscience.org/</a>.</li>
			<li>Littlechild, Commissioner Wilton. Speech at Dedication Ceremony for the Stained Glass Window on Parliament Hill. Ottawa. 26 November 2012. <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370615213241/1370615618980" >https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370615213241/1370615618980</a>.</li>
			<li>Manitoba Historical Society. “Memorable Manitobans: Robert Alexander Hoey (1883–1965).” <a href="http://www.mhs.mb.ca/docs/people/hoey_ra.shtml" >http://www.mhs.mb.ca/docs/people/hoey_ra.shtml</a> (accessed 21 December 2013).</li>
			<li>McCullough, Alan B. “Peyasiw-awasis (Thunderchild, also known as Kapitikow, meaning ‘the one who makes the sound’).” In <i class="citetitle">Dictionary of Canadian Biography</i> Online. <a href="http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/peyasiw_awasis_15E.html" >http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/peyasiw_awasis_15E.html</a> (accessed 19 February 2015).</li>
			<li>Missionary Oblates of Mary Immaculate. “An Apology to the First Nations of Canada by the Oblate Conference of Canada.” 24 July 1991. <a href="http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/oblate_apology_english.pdf" >http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/oblate_apology_english.pdf</a> (accessed 27 October 2014).</li>
			<li>Mullin, Rev. Margaret (Thundering Eagle Woman). “We are One in the Spirit.” In <i class="citetitle">The Presbyterian Church in Canada, We are One in the Spirit: Liturgical Resources</i>, 28. 2010. <a href="http://presbyterian.ca/?wpdmdl=89&amp;" >http://presbyterian.ca/?wpdmdl=89&amp;</a>.</li>
			<li>Onondaga Nation. “Oren Lyons Presents at U.N. 5/15/14.” <a href="http://www.onondaganation.org/news/2014/oren-lyons-presents-at-u-n-51514/" >http://www.onondaganation.org/news/2014/oren-lyons-presents-at-u-n-51514/</a> (accessed 21 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Presbyterian Church in Canada. “Indian Residential Schools. Photographs from The Presbyterian Church in Canada Archives.” <a href="http://www.presbyterianarchives.ca/RS%20-%20Home%20Page.html" >http://www.presbyterianarchives.ca/RS%20-%20Home%20Page.html</a>.</li>
			<li>Presbyterian Church in Canada. “Presbyterian Statement on Aboriginal Spiritual Practices.” <a href="https://ecumenism.net/2015/01/presbyterian-statement-on-aboriginal-spiritual-practices.htm" >https://ecumenism.net/2015/01/presbyterian-statement-on-aboriginal-spiritual-practices.htm</a> (accessed 17 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Presbyterian Church in Canada. <i class="citetitle">The Confession of the Presbyterian Church in Canada as Adopted by the General Assembly</i>. 9 June 1994. <a href="http://presbyterian.ca/?wpdmdl=92&amp;" >http://presbyterian.ca/?wpdmdl=92&amp;</a> (accessed 27 October 2014).</li>
			<li>Presbyterian Church of Canada. “Aboriginal Spirituality—A Theological Framework For.” General Assembly Referral. 2013. <a href="http://presbyterian.ca/?wpdmdl=779&amp;&amp;ind=16" >http://presbyterian.ca/?wpdmdl=779&amp;&amp;ind=16</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
			<li>Reconciliation Canada. “Bernice King’s Speech at the Walk for Reconciliation” (video). September 2013. <a href="http://reconciliationcanada.ca/2013/09/" >http://reconciliationcanada.ca/2013/09/</a>.</li>
			<li>Reconciliation Canada. “City of Vancouver Council Unanimously Support City of Reconciliation Framework.” <a href="http://reconciliationcanada.ca/city-of-vancouver-council-unanimously-support-city-of-reconciliation-framework/" >http://reconciliationcanada.ca/city-of-vancouver-council-unanimously-support-city-of-reconciliation-framework/</a>.</li>
			<li>Reconciliation Canada. “Elders’ Statement. A Shared Tomorrow.” <a href="http://reconciliationcanada.ca/explore/elders-statement/" >http://reconciliationcanada.ca/explore/elders-statement/</a>.</li>
			<li>Smith, Reverend Robert. “Apology to First Nations People.” United Church of Canada, 31st General Council, 1986. <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/beliefs/policies/1986/a651" >http://www.united-church.ca/beliefs/policies/1986/a651</a> (accessed 23 October 2014).</li>
			<li>Treaty Relations Commission of Manitoba. “Public Education/Learning Centre.” <a href="http://www.trcm.ca/public-education/learning-centre/" >http://www.trcm.ca/public-education/learning-centre/</a>.</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. “Affirming Other Spiritual Paths.” <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/aboriginal/schools/affirming-other-spiritual-paths.pdf" >http://www.united-church.ca/files/aboriginal/schools/affirming-other-spiritual-paths.pdf</a> (accessed 17 March 2015).</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. “Apology to Former Students of United Church Indian Residential Schools, and to Their Families and Communities.” October 1998. <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/beliefs/policies/1998/a623" >http://www.united-church.ca/beliefs/policies/1998/a623</a> (accessed 27 October 2014).</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. “Living Faithfully in the Midst of Empire: Report to the 39th General Council.” 2006. <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/economic/globalization/report.pdf" >http://www.united-church.ca/files/economic/globalization/report.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. “Residential Schools Update, January 2012.” <a href="http://develop.united-church.ca/files/communications/newsletters/residential-schools-update_120101.pdf" >http://develop.united-church.ca/files/communications/newsletters/residential-schools-update_120101.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015).</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. “Reviewing Partnership in the Context of Empire.” 2009. <a href="http://www.gc41.ca/sites/default/files/pcpmm_empire.pdf" >http://www.gc41.ca/sites/default/files/pcpmm_empire.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. “The Executive of the General Council, 24–26 March 2012.” Addendum H: Covenanting for Life. <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/addenda_2012-03-2426_executive.pdf" >http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/addenda_2012-03-2426_executive.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015).</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. Executive of the General Council. “Meeting Summary.” 24–26 March 2013. <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/gce_1203_highlights.pdf" >http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/gce_1203_highlights.pdf</a> (accessed 20 March 2015).</li>
			<li>United Church of Canada. Residential School Archive Project. “The Children Remembered.” <a href="http://thechildrenremembered.ca/" >http://thechildrenremembered.ca/</a>.</li>
			<li>Wiebe, Rudy. “Mistahimaskwa.” In <i class="citetitle">Dictionary of Canadian Biography</i> Online. <a href="http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/mistahimaskwa_11E.html" >http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/mistahimaskwa_11E.html</a> (accessed 14 July 2014).</li>
			<li>World Council of Churches. “Statement on the doctrine of discovery and its enduring impact on Indigenous Peoples.” 14–17 February 2012, Bossey, Switzerland. <a href="http://www.oikoumene.org/en/resources/documents/executive-committee/bossey-february-2012/statement-on-the-doctrine-of-discovery-and-its-enduring-impact-on-indigenous-peoples" >http://www.oikoumene.org/en/resources/documents/executive-committee/bossey-february-2012/statement-on-the-doctrine-of-discovery-and-its-enduring-impact-on-indigenous-peoples</a>.</li>
			</ul>

			<h4>5. Theses and Dissertations</h4>
			<ul class="bibliolist">
			<li>Brandak, George Michael. “A Study of Missionary Activity in the Diocese of Athabasca, 1884–1903.” MA thesis, Waterloo Lutheran University, 1972.</li>
			<li>Braun, Connie. “Colonization, Destruction, and Renewal: Stories from Aboriginal Men at the Pe’ Sakastew Centre.” MA thesis, Department of Sociology, University of Saskatchewan, 1998.</li>
			<li>Callahan, Ann B. “On Our Way to Healing: Stories from the Oldest Living Generation of the File Hills Indian Residential School.” MA thesis, University of Manitoba, 2002.</li>
			<li>Carney, Robert. “Relations in Education Between the Federal and Territorial Governments and the Roman Catholic Church in the Mackenzie District, Northwest Territories, 1867–1961.” PhD dissertation, University of Alberta, 1971.</li>
			<li>Cooper-Bolam, Trina. “Healing Heritage: New Approaches to Commemorating Canada’s Indian Residential School System.” MA thesis, Carleton University, 2014</li>
			<li>Foran, Timothy Paul. “‘Les Gens de cette place’: Oblates and the Evolving Concept of Métis at Île-à- la-Crosse, 1845–1898.” PhD dissertation, University of Ottawa, 2011.</li>
			<li>Gresko, Jacqueline Kennedy. “Gender and Mission: The Founding Generations of the Sisters of Saint Ann and the Oblates of Mary Immaculate in British Columbia 1858–1914.” PhD disserta- tion, University of British Columbia, 1999.</li>
			<li>Gull, Norman Andrew. “The ‘Indian Policy’ of the Anglican Church of Canada from 1945 to the 1970s.” MA thesis, Trent University, 1992.</li>
			<li>Kennedy, Jacqueline. “Qu’Appelle Industrial School. White ‘Rites’ for the Indians of the Old North- West.” MA thesis, Carleton University, 1970.</li>
			<li>Persson, Diane Iona. “Blue Quills: A Case Study of Indian Residential Schooling.” PhD dissertation, University of Alberta, 1980.</li>
			<li>Pettit, Jennifer Lorretta. “‘To Christianize and Civilize’: Native Industrial Schools in Canada.” PhD dissertation, University of Calgary, 1997.</li>
			<li>Wasylow, Walter Julian. “History of Battleford Industrial School for Indians.” Masters of Education thesis, University of Saskatchewan, 1972.</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
