<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes - The History</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes_thehistory" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h3>The History</h3>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Frederick Ernest Koe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 30 June 2011, Statement Number: SC091. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Marlene Kayseas, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 16 January 2012, Statement Number: SP035. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Larry Beardy, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thompson, Manitoba, 25 September 2012, Statement Number: SP082. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Florence Horassi, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Tulita, Northwest Territories, 10 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0394. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lily Bruce, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Alert Bay, British Columbia, 4 August 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3285. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Vitaline Elsie Jenner, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-131. (Translated words confirmed by Translation Bureau, Public Works and Government Services Canada [8817169_TG_ Kinugus_EN_CP].) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Nellie Ningewance, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, 1 July 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0305. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bernice Jacks, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3971. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Marthe Basile-Coocoo, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (translated from French), Montréal, Québec, 26 April 2013, Statement Number: 2011-6103. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Pauline St-Onge, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (translated from French), Montréal, Québec, 25 April 2013, Statement Number: 2011-6134. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Campbell Papequash, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Key First Nation, Saskatchewan, 20 January 2012, Statement Number: SP038. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Roy Denny, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Eskasoni First Nation, Nova Scotia, 14 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2678. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Calvin Myerion, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-122. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Archie Hyacinthe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Kenora, Ontario, 15 March 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0279. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Margo Wylde, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vald’Or, Québec, 5 February 2012, Statement Number: SP100. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Murray Crowe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, 1 July 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0306. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Wilbur Abrahams, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Terrace, British Columbia, 30 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3301. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Martin Nicholas, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Grand Rapids, Manitoba, 24 February 2010, Statement Number: 07-MB-24FB10-001. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lorna Morgan, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-041. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Gilles Petiquay, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada translated from French), La Tuque, Québec, 6 March 2013, Statement Number: 2011-6001. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Wilbur Abrahams, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Terrace, British Columbia, 30 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3301. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Peter Ross, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Tsiigehtchic, Northwest Territories, 8 September 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0340. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Daniel Nanooch, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, High Level, Alberta, 4 July 2013, Statement Number: 2011-1868. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bernice Jacks, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3971. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Helen Kakekayash, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 5 February 2011, Statement Number: 01-ON-05FE11-002. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bernard Catcheway, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Skownan First Nation, Manitoba, 12 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2510. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Julianna Alexander, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Enderby, British Columbia, 12 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3286. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, William Herney, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 29 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2923. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Raymond Cutknife, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: SP125. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Timothy Henderson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 28 June 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0291. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Shirley Waskewitch, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 24 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3521. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Patrick Bruyere, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-157. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ernest Barkman, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Garden Hill First Nation, Manitoba, 30 March 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0123. (Translated from Oji-Cree to English by Translation Bureau, Public Works and Government Services Canada, 8956124.) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Paul Dixon, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Val d’Or, Québec, 6 February 2012, Statement Number: SP101. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Betsy Annahatak, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 28 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2896. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Rick Gilbert, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 20 September 2013, Statement Number: 2011-2389. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Nick Sibbeston, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 30 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE202. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, [Name redacted], Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, 1 February 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3879. (Translated from Woodland Cree to English by Translation Bureau, Public Works and Government Services Canada, 8956130.) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jack Anawak, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 30 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE202. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lydia Ross, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-029. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Stephen Kakfwi, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 30 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE202. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Victoria McIntosh, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-123. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Shirley Flowers, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Goose Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador, 20 September 2011, Statement Number: SP025. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 21–22. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 57. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For East Africa, see: Thiong’o, <em>Dreams in a Time of War</em>. For Australia, see: Australia, “‘Bringing Them Home,’ National Inquiry,” <a href="http://www.humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/content/pdf/social_justice/bringing_them_home_report.pdf">www.humanrights.gov.au/sites/default/files/content/pdf/social_justice/bringing_them_home_report.pdf</a> [25]. For Siberia, see: Bartels and Bartels, <em>When the North Was Red</em>, 12; Bloch, <em>Red Ties</em>, 38. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diffie and Winnius, <em>Foundations</em>, 78–83; Pagden, <em>Peoples and Empires</em>, 56. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 62–63. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hobsbawm, <em>On Empire</em>, 67. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wood, <em>Empire of Capital</em>, 74–87. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wolfe, “Settler Colonialism,” 388. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wolfe, “Settler Colonialism,” 388, 391, 399. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Address of C. C. Painter to the 1886 Lake Mohonk Conference, “Proceedings of the Lake Mohonk Conference,” in <em>Eighteenth Annual Report of the Board of Indian Commissioners, 1886</em>, 61–62. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 80–81. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 62. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wood, <em>Empire of Capital</em>, 40–41. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: Diffie and Winius, <em>Foundations</em>, 65–66, 94–95; Pagden, <em>Peoples and Empires</em>, 54; Williams, <em>American Indian</em>, 72–73. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elliott, <em>Empires of the Atlantic</em>, 11, 23; Pagden, <em>Spanish Imperialism</em>, 14. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pagden, <em>Lords of All the World</em>, 47. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elliott, <em>Empires of the Atlantic</em>, 11–12; Frichner, “Preliminary Study,” 11; Seed, <em>Ceremonies of Posses-</em> <em>sion</em>, 17–18. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Verelst, “Some Observations on the Right of the Crown of Great Britain to the North West Continent of America,” PRC co 5/283, f. 5, quoted in Armitage, <em>Ideological Origins</em>, 192. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Banner, “Why Terra Nullius,” 95. The court case is referred to as <em>Mabo v. Queensland (No. 2).</em> <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wood, <em>Origin of Capitalism</em>, 111. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 86–87. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Speech quoted in: <em>Archibald Philip Primrose</em> (<em>5th earl of Rosebery</em>) … <em>Australian speechlets</em>, <em>1883–84</em> <em>[by A. P. Primrose</em>], <a href="http://books.google.ca/books?id=CncIAAAAQAAJ&amp;printsec=frontcover&amp;dq=Australian+speechlets,+1883-84+by+A.P.+Primrose">http://books.google.ca/books?id=CncIAAAAQAAJ&amp;printsec=frontcover&amp;dq=Australian+speechlets,+1883-84+by+A.P.+Primrose</a>.].&amp;hl=en&amp;sa=X&amp;ei=zN2IUuGdMOTA2g-W0vIHYDA&amp;ved=0CDkQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&amp;q=Australian%20speechlets%2C%201883-84%20[by%20A.P.%20Primrose.].&amp;f=false (accessed 17 November 2013). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1884,</em> 154. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Usher, <em>William Duncan</em>, 41. See also: Choquette, <em>Oblate Assault</em>; Huel, <em>Proclaiming the Gospel</em>; Hyam, <em>Britain’s Imperial Century</em>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 85. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Howe, <em>Empire</em>, 90; Perry, “Metropolitan Knowledge,” 109–111. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Huel, <em>Proclaiming the Gospel</em>, 1–6; Choquette, <em>Oblate Assault</em>, 1–20; Choquette, <em>Canada’s Religions</em>, 173–176. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, see: Usher, <em>William Duncan</em>, 8, 11. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moorhouse, <em>Missionaries</em>, 274. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moorhouse, <em>Missionaries</em>, 33; Rompkey, <em>Story of Labrador</em>, 34, 36–39. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Canada, see, for example: McMillan and Yellowhorn, <em>First Peoples</em>. For a global perspective, see: Coates, <em>A Global History</em>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jaenen, “Education for Francization,” 54–55; Trudel, <em>Beginnings of New France</em>, 134–135. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jaenen, <em>Friend and Foe Aspects</em>, 96, 163, 166. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Magnuson, <em>Education in New France</em>, 47–50; Trudel, <em>Beginnings of New France</em>, 231; Axtell, <em>Inva-</em> <em>sion Within</em>, 56–58; Jaenen, “Education for Francization,” 56; Jaenen, <em>Friend and Foe Aspects</em>, 95, 168. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hamilton, <em>Federal Indian Day Schools</em>, 4–5; Fingard, “New England Company,” 30–32. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stevenson, “Red River Indian Mission School,” 141. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Graham, <em>Mush Hole</em>, 7. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, Acc. 1984-85/112, box 47, file 451/25-1, Newspaper article, “Mohawk Institute May Close after 139 Years,” no date; [TAY-001133] TRC, NRA, Diocese of Huron Archives, Anglican Church of Canada, Huron University College, London, ON, Luxton Papers, box 27, Indian Reserves, Richard Isaac, Six Nations Council To Whom It May Concern, 13 March 1970; [TAY-001432] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 479/25-13-001, volume 3, G. D. Cromb to Deputy Minister, 20 March 1970. [TAY-003053-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ryerson, “Report on Industrial Schools,” 76. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ryerson, “Report on Industrial Schools,” 73. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Report of the Special Commissioners 1858</em>, n.p. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6210, file 468-10, part 5, Samuel Devlin to Indian Affairs, 20 May 1946. [MER-003806-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gresko, “Paul Durieu,” <a href="http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/durieu_paul_12E.html">http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/durieu_paul_12E.html</a> (accessed 31 August 2014). McNally gives the opening as 1862: McNally, <em>Lord’s Distant Vineyard</em>, 67. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>McCarthy, <em>From the Great River</em>, 160; Carney, “Grey Nuns and Children,” 291; Duchaussois, <em>Grey</em> <em>Nuns</em>, 148. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>, 156; Davin, <em>Report on Industrial Schools</em>, 10. Population figures for this period are only estimates. James Miller cites 12,000 mixed-blood people in 1870, and, in his 1879 report, Nicholas Flood Davin stated that 28,000 people were under Treaty. Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>, 199; Davin, <em>Report on Industrial Schools</em>, 10. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Great Britain, <em>Rupert’s Land and North-Western Territory Order</em> (Schedule A), 23 June 1870, http:// <a href="http://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/csj-sjc/constitution/lawreg-loireg/p1t32.html">www.justice.gc.ca/eng/rp-pr/csj-sjc/constitution/lawreg-loireg/p1t32.html</a>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Getty and Lussier, <em>Long as the Sun Shines</em>, 35. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Banner, <em>How Indians Lost Their Land</em>, 85. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tobias, “Protection, Civilization, Assimilation,” 128. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>, 156. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>, 154. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Friesen, “Magnificent Gifts,” 205, 212. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Erasmus, <em>Buffalo Days</em>, 250. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ray, <em>Illustrated History</em>, 212; Taylor, “Canada’s Northwest Indian Policy,” 3. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sprague, <em>Canada’s Treaties with Aboriginal People</em>, 13. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of a request for a day school on a reserve, see: McCullough, “Peyasiw-awasis,” <a href="http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/peyasiw_awasis_15E.html">http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/peyasiw_awasis_15E.html</a> (accessed 6 June 2014). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>, 164–165. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Morris, <em>Treaties of Canada</em>, 202. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Canada, the <em>Indian Act</em> had been preceded by the 1868 <em>Act to provide for the organization of</em> <em>the Department of the Secretary of State of Canada and for the Administration of the Affairs of the</em> <em>Indians,</em> and the 1869 <em>An Act for the gradual enfranchisement of Indians</em>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>An Act to amend and consolidate the laws respecting Indians</em>, Statutes of Canada 1876, chapter 18. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Skyscrapers Hide the Heavens</em>, 255. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6810, file 470-2-3, volume 7, Evidence of D. C. Scott to the Special Committee of the House of Commons Investigating the Indian Act amendments of 1920, (L-2)(N-3). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the banning of the Potlatch, see: LaViolette, Struggle for Survival, 41–42; Cole and Chaikin, <em>Iron</em> <em>Hand</em>, 16–17, 95. For the banning of the Thirst Dance, see: Pettipas, <em>Severing the Ties</em>, 53–54, 95–96. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: LaViolette, <em>Struggle for Survival</em>, 41–42; Cole and Chaikin, <em>Iron Hand</em>, 16–17, 95; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3825, file 60511-1, J. Hugonard to Indian Commissioner, 23 November 1903. [RCA-011007-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Sessional Papers 1885, number 116. F., 95–96, J. S. Dennis to Sir John A. Macdonald, 20 December 1878. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Davin, <em>Report on Industrial Schools</em>, 14. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Driver, “Discipline Without Frontiers?,” 282. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parker, <em>Uprooted</em>, 190. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sutherland, <em>Children in English-Canadian Society</em>, 100. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sutherland, <em>Children in English-Canadian Society</em>, 138. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fear-Segal, <em>White Man’s Club</em>, 186; Standing Bear, <em>My People the Sioux</em>, 123–133. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1884</em> (for High River, 76; for Battleford, 154; for Qu’Appelle, 161). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (22 May 1883), 1376. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3647, file 8128, Andsell Macrae, 18 December 1886. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1910</em>, 273. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1883</em>, 104. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3924, file 116823, L. Vankoughnet to Sir John A. Macdonald, 15 March 1886. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6001, file 1-1-1, part 1, Privy Council Order Number 1278, 7 June 1888; [PLD-007312] Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3819, file 58418, J. Hugonnard to Hayter Reed, 11 May 1889; [PLD-009475] Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3675, file 11422-4, J. Hugonnard to E. Dewdney, 5 May 1891. [PLD-009435] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3879, file 91833, Order-in-Council, 22 October 1892. [RIS-000354] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the admission of infected children, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 4037, file 317021, T. Ferrier to the editor, 23 November 1907. [RCA-000315] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For details, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1904</em>, xxvii–xxviii; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, MG17, B2, Class ‘G’ C.1/P.2, Church Missionary Society, “Resolutions Regarding the Administration of the North-West Canada Missions,” 7 April 1903; [PAR-003622] Blake, <em>Don’t you hear</em>; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3928, file 117004-1, “Report on Indian Missions and Schools,” Presented to the Diocesan Synod, Diocese of Calgary, J. W. Tims, August 1908; [OLD-008159] The United Church of Canada Archives, Toronto, Acc. No. 1979.199C, box 5, file 68, “Report of the Synod’s Commission on Indian Affairs,” 5 December 1904; [RIS-000246] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Frank Pedley to Reverend and dear sirs, 21 March 1908; [AEMR-120155] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, Frank Pedley to Norman Tucker, 26 March 1909; [AAC-090228] Archives of Saskatchewan, MacKay Papers, Frank Oliver, “Letter to S. H. Blake, 28 January, 1908,” quoted in Wasylow, “History of Battleford Industrial School,” 225–226; Anglican Church General Synod Archives, 75-103, series 2-14, Frank Oliver to A. G. G., 28 January 1908, quoted in Gull, “‘Indian Policy,’” 15; TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, Letter signed by S. H. Blake, Andrew Baird, Hamilton Cassels, T. Ferrier, R. F. MacKay, 22 May 1908; [AAC-090192] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Frank Pedley to Frank Oliver, 9 April 1908; [AEMR-120157] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, “Report of the Sub-Committee of the Advisory Board On Indian Education,” n.d.; [AAC-090231] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3919, file 116751-1A, J. B. Magnan to D. Laird, 12 December 1902; [SBR-003409] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3919, file 116751-1A, Clifford Sifton to Governor General in Council, 23 December 1903; [FAR-000095] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Frank Pedley to Mr. Oliver, 30 May 1908; [120.00294] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 1, J. Hugonnard to Frank Oliver, 28 March 1908; [PLD-007334] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Superintendent General of Indian Affairs to T. Ferrier, 18 July 1908; [AEMR-016328] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Heron to Frank Oliver, 16 February 1909; [AEMR-120164] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-4, part 1, Association of Indian Workers to Frank Oliver, 19 February 1909; [AEMR-016332] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, FA 10-17, volume 6041, file 160-5, part 1, 1905–1934, Emile Legal to Frank Pedley, 20 July 1908; [AEMR-254243] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, Arthur Barner to S. H. Blake, 16 February 1909. [AAC-090206] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the initial improvement, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6032, file 150-40A, part 1, Headquarters – Compulsory Attendance of Pupils – Indian Schools, 1904–1933, Microfilm reel C-8149, FA 10-17, “Re: Per Capita Grants at Indian Residential Schools,” Russell Ferrier, 5 April 1932. [120.18050] For an example of the impact of inflation, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6468, file 890-1, part 1, J. Welch to D. C. Scott, 28 July 1916. [MIS-001473] For cuts in the 1930s, see: TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 2.15, box 27, file 1, The Joint Delegation and Interview with the Prime Minister, 20 December 1934; [AAC-087280] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 7185, file 1/25-1-7-1, part 1, Harold McGill to Church Officers, Principals of Indian Residential Schools, 22 February 1933. [AEMR-255373] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 7185, file 1/25-1-7-?, part 1, R. A. Hoey to Dr. McGill, 4 November 1938. [AEMR-120432] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For staffing, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1955</em>, 51; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1957</em>, 56. As an experiment in 1949, Indian Affairs had taken on responsibility for directly employing the teaching staff in schools at Shubenacadie, the Mohawk Institute, and Port Alberni. TRC, NRA, DIAND HQ, file 1/25-1-5-2, volume 1, 1952–1969, Laval Fortier to J. P. Mulvihill, 26 October 1953. [AEMR-120563] For diet, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG55, FA 55-19, volume 20784, Treasury Board Submission 559690, Req. Authority for the Recommendation and Establishment of Domestic Staff, Laval Fortier to Secretary, Treasury Board, 22 January 1960. [120.04620] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Canadian Welfare Council and Caldwell 1967, 89. [AEMR-019759] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Canadian Welfare Council and Caldwell 1967, 92. [AEMR-019759] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6032, file 150-40A, part 1, Regulations Relating to the Education of Indian Children, Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1894. [AGA-001516-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives of Canada, RG10, volume 6374, file 764-10, part 1, S. H. Middleton to J. E. Pugh, 26 April 1940. [PUL-071183] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Burnaby, RG10, FA 10-136, volume 11466, 987/18-24, part 1, Truancy, 1952–1969, NAC, Burnaby, R. Sedgewick to Acting Deputy Superintendent General Indian Affairs, 11 October 1891; [SQU-001298-0001] RG10, volume 1575, C-14851, 1898–1899, NAC, Application for Admission, 30 November 1898. [BQL-008267-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, FA 10-379, 1999-01431-6, box 405, 987/25-1-018, part 1, Indian Education – Squamish Students Residence, Fraser District, 1950–1969, NAC, Ottawa, P. Phelan to Legal Adviser, 17 November 1952; [SQU-000595] Burnaby, RG10, FA 10-136, volume 11466, 987/18-24, part 1, Truancy, 1952–1969, NAC, Burnaby, P. Phelan to W. S. Arneil, 22 November 1952. [SQU-001297] For an example of a father who successfully went to court to have his children, who had been voluntarily enrolled in a residential school, returned to him, see: Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 2552, file 112-220-1, Martin Benson to Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 25 September 1903. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 7184, file 1/25-1-5-7, part 1, W. M. Graham to Secretary, 19 February 1926. [NCA-014626] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1945, 168, 183. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Martin Benson, Memorandum, 13, 15 July 1897. [100.00108] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For <em>Indian Act</em>, see: <em>An Act respecting Indians</em>, Statutes of Canada 1951, chapter 29, sections 113–122, 169–172. For regulations, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 1/25-1-5-2, volume 1, “Regulations With Respect to Teaching, Education, Inspection, and Discipline for Indian Residential Schools, Made and Established for the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs Pursuant to Paragraph (a) of Section 114 of the Indian Act,” 20 January 1953. [PAR-001203-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <em>Public Schools Act</em>, Revised Statutes of Manitoba 1954, chapter 215, 923–1,114. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>The Manitoba Gazette</em>, April 9, 1955, 509–510. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6032, file 150-40A, part 1, Headquarters – Compulsory Attendance of Pupils – Indian Schools, 1904–1933, Microfilm reel C-8149, FA 10-17, Indian Agent, Hagersville to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 20 February 1922; [AEMR-255312] <em>An Act respecting Indians</em>, Statutes of Canada 1919–1920, chapter 50, section 1, amending Revised Statutes of Canada 1906, chapter 81, section 10, reproduced in Venne, <em>Indian Acts</em>, 178–179. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6309, file 654-1, part 1, J. K. Irwin to Indian Affairs, 22 October 1926. [GDC-006528] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6309, file 654-1, part 1, J. D. McLean to J. K. Irwin, 29 October 1926. [GDC-006529] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, DIAND HQ, file 1/25-1, volume 19, 1968, J. A. MacDonald to the Minister, 9 October 1968. [AEMR-121636] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1956</em>, 76–77; TRC, ASAGR, Department of Northern Affairs and National Resources, <em>Annual Report Fiscal Year 1957–1958</em>, 115. [AAN-DC-452773] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1931</em>, 60. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:2, box 55, file 6, S. Gould to D. C. Scott, Ottawa, 18 December 1931; [AAC-090271] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, Triennial Report of the Board of Management to the Board of Missions, M.S.C.C. 07/1934, Accession GS 75-2A, Archibald [Fleming], Bishop of the Arctic, “The Arctic,” in S. Gould, General Secretary, Board of Management, M.S.C.C., “Triennial Report of the Board of Management, M.S.C.C.,” 4 July 1934, 353. [AGS-000185] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6112, file 350-10, part 1, W. L. Tyrer to Sutherland, 8 February 1934. [FGA-001100] Although no trace of the decision to award funds to the Catholic school has been found in the archives, by April 1937, the Oblates had begun submitting official Indian Affairs paperwork with regard to the student population at St. Joseph’s. See, for example: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6113, file 351-10, part 1, D. Couture, “Application for Admission to the Ste. Theresa Fort George Catholic Residential School for Louise Jolly,” 1 April 1937. [FTG-003180-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the Carcross, Yukon, fire, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1940</em>, 186. For the Ahousaht, British Columbia, fire, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1940</em>, 186. For the Alberni, British Columbia, fire, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1941</em>, 166. For the File Hills, Saskatchewan, fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, volume 6303, file 653-5, part 6, E. S. Jones to The Secretary, Indian Affairs Branch, Department of Mines and Resources, 10 April 1943; [FHR-000252] Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1942</em>, 136. For the Fort George, Québec (the Anglican school), fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6112, file 350-5, part 1, Thomas Orford to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 3 February 1943. [FGA-001026] For the Onion Lake, Saskatchewan (the Anglican school), fire, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1944</em>, 155. For the Wabasca, Alberta, fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6378, file 767-5, part 3, H. A. Alderwood to R. A. Hoey, 3 January 1945; [JON-003675] Canada, Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, <em>1945</em>, 169. For the Norway House, Manitoba, fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6268, file 581-1, part 2, R. A. Hoey to Acting Deputy Minister, 29 May 1946. [NHU-000117] For the Lac La Ronge, Saskatchewan, fire, see: TRC, NRA, Provincial Archives of Alberta, Anglican Diocese of Athabasca Fonds, Edmonton, AB, Acc. PR1970.0387/1641, box 41, Anglican Diocese of Athabasca Fonds, file A320/572, Indian Schools – General, Official Correspondence of Bishop Sovereign, 1941–1947, Report of Fire at All Saints’ School, Lac la Ronge, Sask., 2 February 1947. [PAR-123539] For the Delmas, Saskatchewan, fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8756, file 671/25-1-010, J. P. B. Ostrander to Indian Affairs Branch, 19 January 1948. [THR-000266-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG85, volume 229, file 630/158-9, part 1, Government Hostel – Chesterfield Inlet, 1929–1953, Extracts from S. J. Bailey’s Report, Eastern Arctic Patrol, 27 July 1948. [CIU-000189] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: Davin, <em>Report on Industrial Schools</em>, 9. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of Métis children at a church-run boarding school, see: Erickson, “‘Bury Our Sorrows in the Sacred Heart,’” 34–35. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of the Métis being viewed as ‘dangerous,’ see: Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6031, “Extract from a letter dated the 19th July, 1899, from the Rev. Father Hugonard.” <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, R776-0-5 (RG55), volume 562, T.B. #252440, Clifford Sifton to Mr. Smart, 18 October 1899. [NPC-523981c] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an early example of this view, see: Canada, Sessional Papers 1885, number 116, 81, Memo: Hugh Richardson, 1 December 1879. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example, see: Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6323, file 658-10, part 3, W. M. Graham to the Secretary of the Department of Indian Affairs, 5 December 1929. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, it was estimated in 1936 that 80% of Métis children in Alberta received no education. Chartrand, “Métis Residential School Participation,” 41. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quiring, <em>CCF Colonialism in Northern Saskatchewan</em>; Barron, <em>Walking in Indian Moccasins</em>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For detailed treatment of the issue, see: Chartrand, Logan, and Daniels, <em>Métis History and Experience</em>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, NRA, National Capital Regional Service Centre – LAC – Ottawa, volume 2, file 600-1, locator #062-94, Education of Eskimos (1949–1957), Department of Northern Affairs and National Resources to Northern Administration and Lands Branch, 8 April 1958; [NCA-016925] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, RG85, volume 1506, file 600-1-1, part 2A, J. G. Wright to Mr. Gibson, 19 November 1946. [NCA-005728] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a 1940 assessment of building conditions, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6012, file 1-1-5A, part 2, R. A. Hoey to Dr. McGill, 31 May 1940. [BIR-000248] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Special Joint Committee, 1946, 3, 15. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1945</em>, 168, 183; Canada, <em>Annual Report</em> <em>of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1955</em>, 70, 76–78. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1949</em>, 199. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>An Act respecting Indians</em>, Statutes of Canada 1951, chapter 29, section 113, reproduced in Venne, <em>Indian Acts</em>, 350. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1961</em>, 57. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1961</em>, 63. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, The Canadian Catholic Conference, “A Brief to the Parliamentary Committee on Indian Affairs,” May 1960, 8. [GMA001642-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Newman, <em>Indians of the Saddle Lake Reserve</em>, 81–87. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a discussion that places both child welfare and residential schools in the context of the ongoing colonization of Aboriginal people, see: McKenzie and Hudson, “Native Children.” <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of this assessment, see: TRC, NRA, Canadian Welfare Council and Caldwell 1967, 89. [AEMR-019759] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples of the link between the closure of residential schools and the increase in children in care, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, box 98, Acc., 1999-01431-6, file 274/25-1010, part 1, P. L. McGillvray to Indian Affairs Branch, 17 November 1964; [NCA-010544] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 211/6-1-010, volume 6, R. F. Davey to Michael Kearney, 12 June 1967; [SRS-000175] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, Acc. 1984-85/112, box 47, file 451/25-1, Newspaper article, “Mohawk Institute May Close after 139 Years,” no date; [TAY-001133] TRC, NRA, Diocese of Huron Archives, Anglican Church of Canada, Huron University College, London, ON, Luxton Papers, box 27, Indian Reserves, Richard Isaac, Six Nations Council To Whom It May Concern, 13 March 1970; [TAY-001432] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 479/25-13-001, volume 3, G. D. Cromb to Deputy Minister, 20 March 1970; [TAY-003053-0001] TRC, NRA, National Capital Regional Service Centre – LAC – Ottawa, file 671/6-2-025, volume 4, Onion Lake Band Council Resolution, 31 July 1974. [ORC-008733-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>McKenzie and Hudson, “Native Children,” 126. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, RCAP [89-22], file E4974-2031, St. Mary’s Student Residence, BC Region, part 1, 1981–1989, B, Benefit to Children,” undated notes from 1982. [MIS-008062-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, DIAND, file 1/25-13, volume 13, R. F. Battle to Deputy Minister, 2 February 1968; AEMR-014646] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, 1/25-13, 01/68–07/68, volume 13, R. F. Davey to Regional Superintendent of Schools, 13 June 1968. [LOW-016591] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1969–1970</em>, 128. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, DIAND HQ, file 1/25-13-2, volume 2, 06/1968–03/1969, J. A. MacDonald to J. J. Carson, 8 November 1968. [AEMR-121640] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Government of Northwest Territories – Education, Culture and Employment, Miscellaneous Hostel Reports RIMS ID# 1209, box 9, “Student Residences (Hostels),” undated. [RCN-007183] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1968–1969</em>, 139; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1970–1971</em>, 19. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, “Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian Policy,” 1969, pages 7, 8, and 22 of 24-page portable document format file. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, “Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian Policy,” 1969, pages 8 and 20 of 24-page portable document format file. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>National Indian Brotherhood, “Statement on the Proposed New Indian Policy,” Ottawa, 26 June 1969, quoted in Weaver, <em>Making Canadian Indian Policy</em>, 174. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Indian Chiefs of Alberta 1970, page 16 of 95-page portable document file. [Citizens plus red paper] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Weaver, <em>Making Canadian Indian Policy</em>, 187. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of local dissatisfaction, see: TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, Jos Houle to G.-M. Latour, 24 July 1966. [OGP-417032] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 779/25-2-009, volume 1 (Ctrl #55-4), Dennis Bell, “Indian School,” CP [Canadian Press], 15 September 1970. [NCA-007310-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Indians Will Operate Blue Quills School,” <em>Edmonton Journal</em>, 1 August 1970. [Blue Quills clippings.pdf] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Burnaby, file 951/6-1-030, volume 9, New Christie Student Residence, 1974–1977, FA 10-138, Archival Acc. V1985-86/397, Archival box 2, R. C. Telford to L. E. Wight, 6 May 1974; [CST-001710-0000] INAC – Main Records Office – Ottawa 901/16-2, volume 5, Audit Reports – B.C. Regional Office, 07/1974–06/1978, locator #L362, DIAND – Ottawa Central Registry, [illegible] for R. C. Pankhurst to Director, Finance and Management, 29 January 1975. [CST-009455] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All these schools were in Saskatchewan. The Beauval school closed in 1995, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file E4965-2013, volume 3, Beauval Residential School, box 1, file 1-5, Memorandum of Understanding and Agreement Re: The Beauval Indian Education Centre, 6 June 1995. [BVL-001306] The Duck Lake and the Gordon’s residences both closed in 1996, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file E4974-10474, volume 2, Ray Gamracy to Dana Commercial Credit Canada, 6 June 1996; [SMD-000651-0000] Gordon’s School, Anglican Indian and Eskimo Residential Schools, Anglican Church of Canada, <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/histories/gordons-school-punnichy">www.anglican.ca/relationships/histories/gordons-school-punnichy</a> (accessed 5 May 2014). The Lestock, Marieval, and Prince Albert residences all closed in 1997, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, Muskowekwan Residential School, box 67, file 1, Muskowekwan Education Centre Board of Directors, Minutes 16 July 1997; [MDD-007310-0001] INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file E4971-361, volume 3, Myler Savill to Lionel Sparvier, 21 July 1997; [MRS-000002-0001] INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file E4974-1355, volume 8, “Education Centre Set to Re-open,” <em>Prince Albert Herald</em>, Carrie Hunter, 15 October 1997 [PAR-003103-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1984–1985</em>, 54. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thompson, “Dehcho Hall to Close its Doors,” <em>Northern News Services online</em>, 26 January 2009, <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2009-01/jan26_09h.html">http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2009-01/jan26_09h.html</a>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, B. Pusharenko, Inuvik, NWT, “Demolition of Former Residential School Called for to Put Bad Memories to Rest,” <em>Edmonton Journal</em>, 13 August 1998. [GNN-000298-0026] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6040, file 160-4, part 1, R. B. Heron to Regina Presbytery, April 1923. [AEMR-016371] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1941</em>, 189; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1942</em>, 154; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1943</em>, 168; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1944</em>, 177; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1945</em>, 190; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1946</em>, 231; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1947</em>, 236; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1948</em>, 234; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1949</em>, 215, 234; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1950</em>, 86–87; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1951</em>, 34–35; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1952</em>, 74–75; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1953</em>, 82–83; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1954</em>, 88–89; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1955</em>, 78–79; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1956</em>, 76–77; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1956–57</em>, 88–89; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1958</em>, 90–91; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1959</em>, 94; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1960</em>, 94; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1961</em>, 103. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1942</em>, 154; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1943</em>, 168; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1944</em>, 177; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1945</em>, 190; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1946</em>, 231; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1947</em>, 236; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1948</em>, 234; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1949</em>, 215; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1950</em>, 86–87; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1951</em>, 34–35; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1952</em>, 74–75; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1953</em>, 82–83; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1954</em>, 88–89; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1955</em>, 78–79; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1956</em>, 76–77; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1956–57</em>, 88–89; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1958</em>, 91; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1959</em>, 94; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1960</em>, 94; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1961</em>, 102; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1962</em>, 73; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1963</em>, 62. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1883</em>, 96. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6323, file 658-6, part 1, Department of Indian Affairs Inspector’s Report for the St. Barnabas, Indian Residential school, D. Hicks, 25 September 1928. [PAR-003233] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6205, file 468-1, part 2, S. R. McVitty to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 30 January 1928. [McVittie to Secretary, Jan 30 1928] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6342, file 750-1, part 1, Microfilm reel C-8699, J. D. McLean to Reverend E. Ruaux, 21 June 1915. [MRY-001517] For a similar report from the Battleford, Saskatchewan, school, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1909</em>, 349–350. For a Manitoba example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6267, file 580-5, part 4, Joseph Hamilton Inspection Report, not dated. [DRS-000570] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 673/23-5-038, volume 1, H. L. Winter to Indian Affairs, 9 September 1932. [MRS-000138-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 1, J. D. McLean to Rev. J. Hugonard, 30 May 1911. [PLD-007442] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6422, file 869-1, part 2, R. H. Cairns, inspector to J. D. McLean, 5 January 1915. [COQ-000390] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6431, file 877-1, part 2, “Extract from Report of Mr. Inspector Cairns dated September 5th and 6th, 1928 on the Alberni Indian Residential School.” [ABR-001591] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6001, file 1-1-1, part 3, “Department of Indian Affairs, Schools Branch,” 31 March 1935. [SRS-000279] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a British Columbia example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6431, file 877-1, part 1, A. W. Neill to A. W. Vowell, 8 July 1909. [ABR-007011-0001] For a Manitoba example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6262, file 578-1, part 4, W. M. Graham to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 4 February 1922. [ELK-000299] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, a 1936 United Church document on First Nations education policy stated that the staff of all United Church schools should be composed of people who had a “Christian motive, or, in other words, a missionary purpose coupled with skill in some particular field to teach his specialty to the Indians.” Staff members were expected to be “closely related to and actively interested in the work of the nearest United Church,” and be acquainted with, and sympathetic to, “the religious education programme of the United Church.” Having laid out these fairly specific requirements, the policy document added that “some minimum educational qualifications for staff members should be outlined.” TRC, NRA, United Church Archives, Acc. 83.050C, box 144-21, “Statement of Policy Re Indian Residential Schools,” June 1936. [UCC-050004] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of the link between low pay and unqualified teachers, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Martin Benson, Memorandum, 15 July 1897, 4, 25. [100.00108] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 4041, file 334503, F. H. Paget to Frank Pedley, 25 November 1908, 55. [RCA-000298] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6431, file 877-1, part 1, A. W. Vowell to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 14 July 1909. [ABR-007011-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1955</em>, 51. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, DIAND, file 1/25-1, volume 22, R. F. Davey to Bergevin, 15 September 1959, 3. [AEMR-019616] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1903</em>, 342–343. For other examples of the emphasis on religious training in the schools, see: Canada, Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1887, 27–28; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1910</em>, 433–434; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1890</em>, 119; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1900</em>, 323. Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1901</em>, 317, 320. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moine, <em>My Life in a Residential School</em>, n.p. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, The Presbyterian Church in Canada Archives, Toronto, ON, Tyler Bjornson File, ‘Presbyterian Research,’ “Presbyterian Indian Residential School Staff Handbook,” 1. [IRC-041206] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Kelly, see: Morley, <em>Roar of the Breakers</em>, 57, 158. For Ahenakew, see: Ahenakew, <em>Voices of the</em> Plains Cree*, 14–24. For Kennedy, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1902</em>, 194. For Dion, see: Dion, <em>My Tribe the Crees</em>, 156–163. For Johnson, see: Johnston, <em>Buckskin &amp; Broadcloth</em>, 46. For Lickers, see: “Norman Lickers First Ontario Indian Lawyer,” <em>Brantford Expositor</em>, November 18, 1938, quoted in Briggs, “Legal Professionalism,” 2. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Special Joint Committee, 1947, 747. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, David Charleson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Deroche, British Columbia, 20 January 2010, Statement Number: 2011-5043. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Isabelle Whitford, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Keeseekoowenin First Nation, Manitoba, 28 May 2010, Statement Number: S-KFN-MB-01-004. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Betsy Olson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 21 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-4378. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Leona Agawa, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, 6 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-4-6NOV10-006. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1921</em>, 28. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6014, file 1-1-6 MAN, part 1, Duncan Campbell Scott to Mr. Meighen, 1 June 1920. [NCA-002403] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Special Joint Committee, <em>Minutes of Evidence</em>, D. F. Brown Presiding, 15 April 1947, 483–484. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Special Joint Committee, <em>Minutes of Evidence</em>, D .F. Brown Presiding, 17 April 1947, 505. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG85, volume 1338, file 600-1-1, part 19, D. W. Hepburn, “Northern Education: Facade for Failure,” <em>Variables: the Journal of the Sociology Club</em> (University of Alberta) 2, no. 1 (February 1963): 16. [NCA-005960] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG85, volume 1338, file 600-1-1, part 19, D. W. Hepburn, “Northern Education: Facade for Failure.” <em>Variables: the Journal of the Sociology Club</em> (University of Alberta) 2, no. 1 (February 1963): 17. [NCA-005960] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG85, volume 1338, file 600-1-1, part 19, D. W. Hepburn, “Northern Education: Facade for Failure.” <em>Variables: the Journal of the Sociology Club</em> (University of Alberta) 2, no. 1 (February 1963): 18. [NCA-005960] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, National Archives of Canada, RG10, volume 8760, file 901/25-1, part 2, R. F. Davey to Director, 14 March 1956, 4. [AEMR-120651] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, NRA, DIAND, file 1/25-1 (E.10), “Report on Textbooks,” 6–9; [AEMR-019193A] Commission Parent, <em>Rapport de la Commission royale d’enquête sur l’enseignement dans la province de Québec</em>, volume 3, <em>L’administration de l’enseignement</em>, part B, “Diversité religieuse, culturelle, et unité de l’administration,” <a href="http://classiques.uqac.ca/contemporains/">http://classiques.uqac.ca/contemporains/</a> quebec_commission_parent/rapport_parent_4/rapport_parent_vol_4.pdf, paragraph 210 (accessed 7 August 2012); TRC, NRA, DIAND, file 1/25-1 (E.10), “Report on Textbooks,” 6–9; [AEMR-019193A] Vanderburgh, The Canadian Indian. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, DIAND, file 1/25-1 (E.10), “Report on Textbooks,” 1–6. [AEMR-019193A] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mary Courchene, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Pine Creek First Nation, Manitoba, 28 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2515. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lorna Cochrane, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC110. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elias, “Lillian Elias,” 51. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, AVS, Victoria McIntosh, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-123. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Walter Jones, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 14 April 2012, Statement Number: 2011-4008. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pigott, “The Leadership Factory,” B3. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Blondin-Andrew, “New Ways of Looking for Leadership,” 64. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Amagoalik, quoted in McGregor, <em>Inuit Education</em>, 110. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Amagoalik, <em>Changing the Face of Canada</em>, 43–46. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, David Simailak, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Baker Lake, Nunavut, 15 November 2011, Statement Number: SP032. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Roddy Soosay, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: 2011-2379. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Martha Loon, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 25 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-24NOV10-021. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Frederick Ernest Koe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 30 June 2011, Statement Number: SC091. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Madeleine Dion Stout, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-059. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6191, file 462-1, part 1, Russell T. Ferrier to George Prewer, 8 February 1922. [CRS-001015] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1887</em>, 126. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1884</em>, 155. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1886</em>, 139. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3930, file 117377-1 A, H. Reed to Bishop of Rupert’s Land, 31 May 1893. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wasylow, “History of Battleford Industrial School,” 467. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elias, “Lillian Elias,” 54–55. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For laundry example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6207, file 468-5, part 6, S. R. McVitty to Secretary Indian Affairs, 3 January 1929. [MER-000751] For kitchen example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6058, file 265-13, part 1, J. P. Mackey to A. F. MacKenzie, 20 May 1930. [SRS-000252] For workshop example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6219, file 471-13, part 1, Russell T. Ferrier to J. Howitt, 13 June 1932. [AGA-000069] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 3, A. F. MacKenzie to G. Leonard, 6 May 1936. [PLD-006119] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 3, A. F. MacKenzie to William Hall, 18 May 1936. [PLD-000750] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 3, William Hall to Indian Affairs, 30 April 1936. [PLD-000746] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6255, file 576-1, part 4, R. T. Chapin to A. G. Hamilton, 10 September 1941. [BRS-000461-0001] For the boy’s age, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6258, file 576-10, part 8, “Application for Admission,” Kenneth Smith, 1 July 1938. [BRS-002184-0007] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6259, file 576-23, part 1, G. C. Elwyn to RCMP, 20 April 1949. [BRS-000332] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6352, file 753-23, part 1, 1935–1944, Microfilm reel C-8709, Acting Director to J. T. Faunt, 18 December 1944. [EDM-003369] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6251, file 575-1, part 3, R. A. Hoey to A. G. Smith, 24 September 1942. [BIR-000272] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For ending of half-day system, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 1/25-1-5-2, volume 1, Superintendent General DIAND, “Regulations with respect to teaching, education, inspection, and discipline for Indian Residential Schools, Made and Established by the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs Pursuant to Paragraph (a) of Section 114 of the Indian Act,” 20 January 1953; [PAR-001203-0001] H. M. Jones to Deputy Minister. [PAR-001203-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 128/25-2-575, volume 1, J. R. Bell to R. D. Ragan, 17 February 1959. [IRC-041312] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3674, file 11422, E. Dewdney to Thomas Clarke, 31 July 1883. [120.06668] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6452, file 884-1, part 1, Microfilm reel 8773, “Rules and Regulations, Kootenay Industrial School.” [AEMR-011621A] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3836, file 68557, H. Reed, Suggestions for the Government of Indian schools, 27 January 1890. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1894</em>, 248–249. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1887</em>, 128. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1898</em>, 345. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1898</em>, 355. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1898</em>, 302. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1903</em>, 457. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, St. Paul’s Archives, Acts of Canonical Visitation, 1883–1966, Stacks 2L, Acte Général de Visite des Missions Indiennes du Nord-Ouest Canadien par le T.R.P. Théodore Labouré, O.M.I., Supérieur Géneral, Rome Maison Générale, 45. [OMI-034614] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wasylow, “History of Battleford Industrial School,” 449. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moran, <em>Stoney Creek Woman</em>, 58. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Callahan, “On Our Way to Healing,” 68. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Graham, <em>Mush Hole</em>, 368. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Provincial Archives of British Columbia, Transcript Disc #182, Mary Englund, interviewed by Margaret Whitehead, 31 July 1980, PABC No. 3868. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Graham, <em>Mush Hole</em>, 449. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Arthur Ron McKay, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-044. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Peter Nakogee, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Timmins, Ontario, 9 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-4-6NOV10-023. (Translated from Swampy Cree to English by Translation Bureau, Public Works and Government Services Canada, 8961944_002.) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Meeka Alivaktuk (translated from Inuktitut), Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Pangnirtung, Nunavut, 13 February 2012, Statement Number: SP045. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Sam Kautainuk (translated from Inuktitut), Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Pond Inlet, Nunavut, 7 February 2012, Statement Number: SP044. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Greg Rainville, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-1752. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, William Herney, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 29 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2923. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Alphonsine McNeely, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Good Hope, Northwest Territories, 13 July 2010, Statement Number: 01-NWT-JY10-002. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Pierrette Benjamin, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, La Tuque, Québec, 6 March 2013, Statement Number: SP105. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, John Kistabish (translated from French), Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Montréal, Québec, 26 April 2013, Statement Number: 2011-6135. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snow, <em>These Mountains Are Our Sacred Places</em>, 110. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Andrew Bull Calf, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, 10 October 2013, Statement Number: 2011-0273. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Evelyn Kelman, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, 10 October 2013, Statement Number: SP128. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Marilyn Buffalo, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: SP125. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Sarah McLeod, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Kamloops, British Columbia, 8 August 2009, Statement Number: 2011-5009. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 7936, file 32-104, J. W. House to G. H. Gooderham, 26 January 1942. [OLD-004156-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, 875-1, part 4, volume 6426, 1937–1947, NAC, F. E. Anfield to Ex-Pupils &amp; Graduates of the Kwawkewlth Agency, 6 April 1943. [MIK-002742-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thaddee Andre (translated from French), Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Montréal, Québec, 25 April 2013, Statement Number: 2011-6068. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example, the brief that the Canadian Catholic Conference submitted to the Joint Committee of the Senate and House of Commons on Indian Affairs in 1960. TRC, NRA, No document source, no document location, “CCC Brief on Indian Welfare and Education,” <em>Indian Record</em>, June 1960, 3. [BVT-001818] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Alex Alikashuak, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-137. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Welfare Council, <em>Indian Residential Schools</em>, 100. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Provincial Archives of Alberta, PAA 71.220 B56 2429, J. Weitz, “Report on the use of the language, history and customs of the Blood Indians in the classes of Level I, during the school year 1968–69,” 30 June 1969. [OGP-023347] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example from British Columbia, see: TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, 958/25-13, volume 3, J. A. Andrews to R. F. Davey, 28 June 1966. [ABR-000402] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1974–1975</em>, 32–33. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Rose Dorothy Charlie, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Whitehorse, Yukon, 27 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-1134. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Joline Huskey, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Behchoko, Northwest Territories, 15 April 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0231. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bruce R. Dumont, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Batoche, Saskatchewan, 23 July 2010, Statement Number: 01-SK-18-25JY10-013. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (22 May 1888), 1681. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6816, file 486-2-5, part 1, H. Reed to J. Hugonnard, 13 June 1890. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1896</em>, xxxviii. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for examples: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1894</em>, 151; Canada, Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1894*, 193–194; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1897</em>, 284. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 1347, Microfilm reel C-13916, P. Claessen to W. R. Robertson, 17 August 1909. [KUP-004235] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1909</em>, 420. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3881, file 934189, M. Begg to A. Forget, 23 February 1895. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6318, file 657-1, part 1, A. E. Forget to Indian Agent, Touchwood Hills, 31 January 1896. [MDD-000851] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6326, file 659-10, part 1, J. E. Pratt to Philip Phelan, 15 June 1936. [ORC-006021] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6816, file 486-2-5, part 1, Extract Presbytery of Winnipeg, Committee on Indian Work, R. J. MacPherson, 9 September 1922. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Montour, <em>Brown Tom’s School Days</em>, 26. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brass, <em>I Walk in Two Worlds</em>, 25. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brass, <em>I Walk in Two Worlds</em>, 25–26. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moran, <em>Stoney Creek Woman</em>, 53–54. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted in Krech, “Nutritional Evaluation,” 186. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted in Krech, “Nutritional Evaluation,” 186. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1895</em>, 114. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3918, file 116659-1, John F. Smith to Assistant Deputy and Secretary, Indian Affairs, 29 March 1918. [AEMR-255360] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, FA 10-13, volume 3918, Microfilm reel C-10161, file 116.659-1, 1892–1920, Spec. Claims Kamloops Agency: General Correspondence Pertaining to Kamloops Industrial School, F. V. Agnew to Indian Affairs, 4 June 1918. [KAM-009763] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Martin Benson, to J. D. McLean, 15 July 1897. [100.00109] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6187, file 461-1, part 3, Frank Edwards to the Secretary, Indian Affairs Branch, 26 June 1939. [IRC-048013] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples just from the 1920s, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3933, file 117657-1, Microfilm reel C-10164, W. M. Graham to Duncan C. Scott, 1 October 1914; [AEMR-013533] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6348, file 752-1, part 1, 1894–1936, Microfilm reel 8705, “Extract from Nurse Ramage’s report, November 1921”; [CFT000156-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6348, file 752-1, part 1, 1894–1936, Microfilm reel 8705, “Extract of report of G. H. Gooderham, for month of October 1921”; [CFT-000148] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6337, file 663-1, part 1, Russell T. Ferrier to Reverend A. Watelle, 31 January 1922; [THR-000149] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6337, file 663-1, part 1, Russell T. Ferrier to Reverend A. Watelle, 16 February 1922; [THR-000151] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 2, “Memorandum for File,” Russell T. Ferrier, 17 March 1922; [PLD-007242] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6444, file 881-5, part 2, 1922–1924, Microfilm reel C-8767, “Extract from Inspector’s Report on the Fraser Lake Residential School, dated April 23rd and 24th, 1923”; [LEJ-003751] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6443, file 881-1, part 1, N. Coccola to J. D. McLean, 22 June 1923; [LEJ-001012] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6318, file 657-1, part 1, A. F. MacKenzie to J. B. Hardinge, 21 September 1923; [MDD-000731] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6324, file 659-5, part 2, “Onion Lake R.C. Boarding School,” 1926; [ORC-000346-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6252, file 575-5, part 2, A. G. Hamilton to Mr. Graham, 23 June 1927; [BIR-000079] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6252, file 575-5, part 2, W. Murison to W. Graham, 17 November 1927; [BIR-000093] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6268, file 580-14, part 1, A. F. MacKenzie to J. W. Waddy, 25 April 1927; [DRS-000574] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, volume 6268, file 580-14, part 1, J. W. Waddy to Assistant Deputy and Secretary, 6 May 1927; [DRS-000575] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6267, file 580-1, part 2, J. Waddy to Indian Affairs, 24 November 1928; [DRS-000564] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6267, file 580-1, part 2, Inspection report, 31 October 1929. [DRS-000566] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, T. M. Kennedy to Reverend Father Provincial, 2 December 1937. [OKM-000248] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6455, file 884-14, part 1, Microfilm reel C-8777, “Extract from report of Inspector Cairns, Dated Nov. 9, 1922, on the Kuper Island Industrial School.” [KUP-003836-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6262, file 578-1, part 4, W. Murison to Indian Affairs, 2 June 1925. [ELK-000330] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Health Canada, Food and Nutrition, Canada’s Food Guides from 1942 to 1992, <a href="http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/food-guide-aliment/context/fg_history-histoire_ga-eng.php#fnb9">http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/food-guide-aliment/context/fg_history-histoire_ga-eng.php#fnb9</a> (accessed 14 December 2013). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6306, file 652-5, part 6, L. B. Pett to P. E. Moore, 8 December 1947. [SMD-001897-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, 8796, file 1/25-13, part 4, L. B. Pett to H. M. Jones, 21 March 1958. [NPC-400776] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Headquarters, 1/25-1-4-1, Indian Education – Dietary Scale, Residential Schools, K. A. Feyrer, G. C. Butler, 22 December 1966. [LOW-002326-0004] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Unknown document location, file 901/25-13, Gerald Michaud, 1 April 1969. [120.08100C] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG29, volume 2990, file 851-6-4, part 5a, L. Leclerc to A/ Regional Director, Manitoba Region, 26 November 1970. [NPC-605542] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Daisy Diamond, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC110. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Dora Fraser, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 19 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-19JU10-012. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ellen Okimaw, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Timmins, Ontario, 8 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-4-6NOV10-022. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bernard Catcheway, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Skownan First Nation, Manitoba, 12 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2510. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bernard Sutherland, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Albany, Ontario, 29 January 2013, Statement Number: 2011-3180. (Translated from Cree to English by Translation Bureau, Public Works and Government Services Canada, 8961944_003.) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Nun Forced Native Students to Eat Their Own Vomit,” <em>Edmonton Journal</em>, 25 June 1999. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Simon Awashish, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, La Tuque, Québec, 5 March 2013, Statement Number: SP104. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Woodie Elias, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort McPherson, Northwest Territories, 12 September 2012, Statement Number: 2011-0343. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Dorothy Nolie, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Alert Bay, British Columbia, 20 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3294. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Nellie Trapper, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-086. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Inez Dieter, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 16 January 2012, Statement Number: SP035. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Gladys Prince, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Brandon, Manitoba, 13 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2498. (Translated from Ojibway to English by Translation Bureau, Public Works and Government Services Canada, 8956132.) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Frances Tait, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3974. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Hazel Bitternose, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 17 January 2012, Statement Number: SP036. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sadowski, “Preliminary Report on the Investigation,” 7–8. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, LACAR, Library and Archives Canada, Ottawa, RG29, Department of Health fonds, Medical Services sous-fonds, Medical Services Branch Central Registry File series, Administrative Records from Blocks 800 to 849 sub-series, finding aid 29-143, Perm. volume 2622, file 800-4-9, file volume 1, file dates 09/1952 to 11/1976, file name “Records Retirement,” <em>Indian and Northern Health Services Administrative Circular 57-66</em>, Destruction and Retention of Documents, P. E. Moore, 7 August 1957. [46a-c000301-d0008-001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1893</em>, 91–97. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6016, file 1-1-23, part 1, A. F. MacKenzie to Indian Agents, Principals of Indian Residential Schools, 17 April 1935. [SBR-001147-0000] Under this policy, the principal was to inform the Indian agent of the death of a student. The agent was then to convene and chair a three-person board of inquiry. The two other members of the board were to be the principal and the physician who attended the student. The board was to complete a form provided by Indian Affairs that requested information on the cause of death and the treatment provided to the child. Parents were to be notified of the inquiry and given the right to attend or have a representative attend the inquiry to make a statement. However, an inquiry was not to be delayed for more than seventy-two hours to accommodate parents. TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6016, file 1-1-23, part 1, Indian Affairs Memorandum, 17 April 1935. [SBR-001147-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for examples: TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, Anglican Church of Canada, GS-75-103, B17, Minutes of meeting of Indian and Eskimo Commission Held on Tuesday, January 11th, 1927, 11; [AAC-083001] St. Boniface Historical Society, Archives Deschâtelets, L 541 M27L 266, Brachet to père provincial, 20 October 1928. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6302, file 650-23, part 2, Inspector, Commanding Prince Albert Sub-Division to The Officer in Charge, RCMP, Regina, Saskatchewan, 10 September 1942. [BVL-000822] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For discussions of the health conditions on the Prairies and the federal government’s failure to meet its Treaty commitments, see: Carter, <em>Lost Harvests</em>; Daschuk, <em>Clearing the Plains</em>; and Lux, <em>Medicine that Walks</em>. For food and Treaties, see: Miller, <em>Skyscrapers Hide the Heavens</em>, 228–230. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Martin Benson, to J. D. McLean, 15 July 1897. [100.00109] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1904</em>, 204. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6012, file 1-1-5A, part 2, R. A. Hoey to Dr. McGill, 31 May 1940. [BIR-000248] For date of Hoey’s appointment, see: Manitoba Historical Society, Memorable Manitobans: Robert Alexander Hoey (1883–1965), <a href="http://www.mhs.mb.ca/docs/people/hoey_ra.shtml">http://www.mhs.mb.ca/docs/people/hoey_ra.shtml</a> (accessed 21 December 2013). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 6-21-1, volume 4, control 25-2, The National Association of Principals and Administrators of Indian Residences Brief Presented to the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development as requested by Mr. E. A. Cote, Deputy Minister, prepared in 1967, presented 15 January 1968. [NCA-011495] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 13033, file 401/25-13, volume 1, R. F. Davey to H. B. Rodine, 5 February 1968. [AEMR-014634] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Beauval fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6300, file 650-1, part 1, Louis Mederic Adam to Indian Affairs, 22 September 1927. [BVL-000879] For Cross Lake fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6260, file 577-1, part 1, J. L. Fuller to A. MacNamara, 8 March 1930; [CLD-000933-0000] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6260, file 577-1, part 1, William Gordon to Assistant Deputy and Secretary, Indian Affairs, 10 March 1930. [CLD-000934] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For deaths, see: Stanley, “Alberta’s Half-Breed Reserve,” 96–98; Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6300, file 650-1, part 1, O. Charlebois to Duncan Scott, 21 September 1927; [BVL-000874] Louis Mederic Adam to Indian Affairs, 22 September 1927; [BVL-000879] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6260, file 577-1, part 1, J. L. Fuller to A. McNamara, 8 March 1930; [CLD-000933-0000] William Gordon to Assistant Deputy and Secretary, Indian Affairs, 10 March 1930; [CLD-000934] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 675/6-2-018, volume 2, D. Greyeyes to Indian Affairs, 22 June 1968. [GDC-005571] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1906</em>, 274–275. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bryce, <em>Report on the Indian Schools</em>, 18. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bryce, <em>Report on the Indian Schools</em>, 17. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bryce, <em>Report on the Indian Schools</em>, 18. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For details, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1904</em>, xxvii–xxviii; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, MG17, B2, Class ‘G’ C.1/P.2, Church Missionary Society, “Resolutions Regarding the Administration of the North-West Canada Missions,” 7 April 1903; [PAR-003622] Blake, <em>Don’t you hear</em>; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3928, file 117004-1, “Report on Indian Missions and Schools,” Presented to the Diocesan Synod, Diocese of Calgary, J. W. Tims, August 1908; [OLD-008159] The United Church of Canada Archives, Toronto, Acc. No. 1979.199C, box 5, file 68, “Report of the Synod’s Commission on Indian Affairs,” 5 December 1904; [RIS-000246] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Frank Pedley to Reverend and dear sirs, 21 March 1908; [AEMR-120155] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, Frank Pedley to Norman Tucker, 26 March 1909; [AAC-090228] Archives of Saskatchewan, MacKay Papers, Frank Oliver, “Letter to S. H. Blake, 28 January, 1908,” quoted in Wasylow, “History of Battleford Industrial School,” 225–226; Anglican Church General Synod Archives, 75-103, series 2-14, Frank Oliver to A. G. G., 28 January 1908, quoted in Gull, “‘Indian Policy,’” 15; TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, Letter signed by S. H. Blake, Andrew Baird, Hamilton Cassels, T. Ferrier, R. F. MacKay, 22 May 1908; [AAC-090192] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Frank Pedley to Frank Oliver, 9 April 1908; [AEMR-120157] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, “Report of the Sub-Committee of the Advisory Board On Indian Education,” n.d.; [AAC-090231] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3919, file 116751-1A, J. B. Magnan to D. Laird, 12 December 1902; [SBR-003409] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3919, file 116751-1A, Clifford Sifton to Governor General in Council, 23 December 1903; [FAR-000095] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Frank Pedley to Mr. Oliver, 30 May 1908; [120.00294] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 1, J. Hugonnard to Frank Oliver, 28 March 1908; [PLD-007334] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Superintendent General of Indian Affairs to T. Ferrier, 18 July 1908; [AEMR-016328] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, Heron to Frank Oliver, 16 February 1909; [AEMR-120164] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-4, part 1, Association of Indian Workers to Frank Oliver, 19 February 1909; [AEMR-016332] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, FA 10-17, volume 6041, file 160-5, part 1, 1905–1934, Emile Legal to Frank Pedley, 20 July 1908; [AEMR-254243] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 3:1, box 48, file 3, Arthur Barner to S. H. Blake, 16 February 1909. [AAC-090206] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6039, file 160-1, part 1, <em>Correspondence and Agreement Relating to the Maintenance and Management of Indian Boarding Schools</em> (Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1911). [AEMR-120208A] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6113, file 350-23, part 1, H. A. Alderwood to Percy Moore, 25 January 1946; [FGA-001121] TRC, NRA, No document location, no file source, 988/23-9, p. 2, 1947–48, R. H. Moore to Indian Affairs Branch, 30 June 1948; [KUP-001240] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6279, file 584-10, part 4, R. S. Davies to Indian Affairs, 3 October 1951; [SBR-004545-0000] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6445, file 881-10, part 5, P. E. Moore to Superintendent, Welfare and Training Division, 23 December 1940. [LEJ-002117] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1893</em>, 173. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3674, file 11422-5, H. Reed to Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 13 May 1891. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3920, file 116818, H. J. Denovan, 1 May 1901. [EDM-009805] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Regina, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3927, file 116836-1A, J. A. Graham to J. A. Sinclair, 2 February 1904. [RIS-000075] For Onion Lake, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG29, volume 2915, file 851-1-A671, part 1a, Lang Turner to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 31 October 1921. [NPC-602633] For Mission, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6470, file 890-5, part 2, A. O’N. Daunt, 18 December 1924. [MIS-004992] For Muncey, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6207, file 468-5, part 7, A. F. MacKenzie to K. J. Beaton, 9 July 1935. [MER-000845] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6305, file 652-1, part 1, J. McArthur to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 5 July 1909; [SMD-001186] 6 July 1909. [SMD-001187] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3921, file 116818-1B, J. F. Woodsworth to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 25 November 1918. [EDM-000956] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6041, file 160-5, part 1, “Memorandum of the Convention of the Catholic Principals of Indian Residential Schools held at Lebret, Saskatchewan, August 28 and 29, 1924.” [200.4.00016] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example from the Sarcee Reserve school, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG29, volume 3403, file 823-1-A772, T. J. Fleetham to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 4 March 1915. [NPC-604045a] For an example from the High River school, see: Provincial Archives of Alberta, Oblates of Mary Immaculate, école Dunbow, Boîte 80, #3381, Journal quotidien de l’école Dunbow, 18 January 1916, quoted in Pettit, “‘To Christianize and Civilize,’” 254. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For concerns about hospitals from the 1940s, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG29, volume 2905, file 851-1-A486, part 1, P. E. Moore to B. T. McGhie, 19 February 1942. [NPC-620532] For overall concerns regarding care in British Columbia school infirmaries in 1960, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, RG10, volume 8697, file 957/6-1, part 3, P. E. Moore to H. M. Jones, 22 July 1960. [MIS-000240] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For complaints from the Winnipeg, Manitoba, school, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8797, file 1/25-13, part 10, André Renaud to R. F. Davey, 10 August 1959. [NRD-300276] For complaints from the Roman Catholic school in The Pas, Manitoba, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG29, volume 2915, file 851-1-A578, part 3, P. E. Moore to Regional Superintendent, Central Region, INHS, 15 May 1961. [NPC-602638] For complaints from the La Tuque, Québec, school, see: TRC, NRA, Quebec Regional Service Centre – LAC – Québec City, Acc. 81-116, box 303441, file 377/17-1, J. E. DeWolf to R. L. Boulanger, 21 January 1965. [LTR001513-0005] For concerns from the Roman Catholic school in Cardston, Alberta, see: TRC, NRA, Provincial Archives – Alberta, PAA 71.220 B161 2419, J. E. Y. Levaque to Mr. Tully, 19 November 1967. [OGP-023087] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Waldram, Herring, and Young, <em>Aboriginal Health in Canada</em>, 188–198; Wherrett, <em>Miracle of the Empty Beds</em>, 109–110. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, Canadian Tuberculosis Association, quoted in Wherrett, <em>Miracle of the Empty Beds</em>, 111. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3940, file 121698-13, Summary of statements made at meeting attached to correspondence, H. R. Halpin to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 16 November 1897. For Kah-pah-pah-mah-am-wa-ko-we-ko-chin’s name and his being deposed from office, see: Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3940, file 121698-13, Extract of a report of a Committee of the Honourable Privy Council Approved his Excellency on the 20 September 1897. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moine, <em>My Life in a Residential School</em>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dion, <em>My Tribe the Crees</em>, 129. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baker, <em>Khot-La-Cha</em>, 46. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ray Silver, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Mission, British Columbia, 17 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3467. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, [Name redacted], Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Deline, Northwest Territories, 2 March 2010, Statement Number: 07-NWT-02MR1-002. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1888</em>, xiv. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fraser River Heritage Park, The OMI Cemetery, <a href="http://www.heritagepark-mission.ca/omicemetery.html">http://www.heritagepark-mission.ca/omicemetery.html</a> (accessed 4 November 2014). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Allard’s diary, quoted in Cronin, Cross in the Wilderness, 219. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3921, file 116818-1B, J. F. Woodsworth to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 25 November 1918. [EDM-000956] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shanahan, <em>Jesuit Residential School at Spanish</em>, 4. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6016, file 1-1-12, part 1, “Burial Expenses,” J. D. McLean, no date. [PAR-008816] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples from the Spanish, Ontario, school, see: Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6217, file 471-1, part 1, N. Dugas to Dear Sir, 25 August 1913; [Story no 1.1.jpg] Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6217, file 471-1, part 1, N. Dugas to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 2 September 1913. [Story no 1.1.6.jpg] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brass, <em>I Walk in Two Worlds</em>, 26. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, LACAR, Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Indian and Inuit Affairs Program, 133619, Yukon Regional Office, Accession 89-476 VFRC, box 7, file volume 1, file number 29-3, J. H. Gordon to Superintendent, Indian Affairs, Yukon, 16 July 1958; [46b-c009024-d0015-001] TRC, LACAR, Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Indian and Inuit Affairs Program, 133619, Yukon Regional Office, Accession 89-476 VFRC, box 7, file volume 1, file number 29-3, M. Matas to Gordon Harris, 16 April 1958; [46a-c001040-d0010-005] TRC, LACAR, Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Indian and Inuit Affairs Program, 133619, Yukon Regional Office, Accession 89-476 VFRC, box 7, file volume 1, file number 29-3, M. Matas to W. L. Falconer, 22 July 1958; [46a-c001040-d0010-002] TRC, LACAR, Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Indian and Inuit Affairs Program, 133619, Yukon Regional Office, Accession 89-476 VFRC, box 7, file volume 1, file number 29-3, W. L. Falconer to Director, Indian and Northern Health Services, 24 July 1958; [46a-c001040-d0010-001] TRC, LACAR, Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Indian and Inuit Affairs Program, 133619, Yukon Regional Office, Accession 89-476 VFRC, box 7, file volume 1, file number 29-3, M. G. Jutras to Indian Commissioner, British Columbia, 26 August 1958. [46b-c009024-d0010-001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, The Presbyterian Church in Canada Archives, Toronto, ON, Acc. 1988-7004, box 17, file 4, Colin Wasacase to Giollo Kelly, 17 November 1966. [CJC-007910] For Wenjack’s age, see: Adam, “The Lonely Death of Charlie Wenjack,” 30. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, National Capital Regional Service Centre – LAC – Ottawa, file 486/18-2, volume 2, box V-24-83, 06/26/1946–09/23/1975, M. J. Pierce to Indian Affairs, 23 October 1974; [FTA-001096] Edwards, “This Is about Reuniting a Family, Even in Death,” <em>Toronto Star</em>, 4 March 2011, <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/04/this_is_about_reuniting_a_family_even_in_death.html">http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/04/this_is_about_reuniting_a_family_even_in_death.html</a>; Edwards, “Star Gets Action: Charlie Hunter Headed Home,” <em>Toronto Star</em>, 24 March 2011, <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/24/star_gets_action_charlie_hunter_headed_home.html">http://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2011/03/24/star_gets_action_charlie_hunter_headed_home.html</a>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wasylow, “History of Battleford Industrial School,” 268. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3920, file 116818, D. L. Clink to Indian Commissioner, June 4 1895. [EDM-003380] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3920, file 116818, H. Reed to Assistant Commissioner, 28 June 1895. [EDM-003376] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6358, file 758-1, part 1, Reverend Canon Gould to Duncan Campbell Scott, 26 January 1920. [IRC-041334] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8542, file 51/25-1, part 2, Philip Phelan, 14 April 1953. [FAR-000067] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3558, file 64, part 39, David Laird to Superintendent of Indian Affairs, 13 March 1899. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 1346, Microfilm reel C-13916, G. Donckele to W. H. Lomas, 29 December 1896. [KUP-004264] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Audette, “Report on the Commission,” 2–7. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3880, file 92499, Memorandum, Hayter Reed, undated; T. Clarke, “Report of Discharged Pupils,” in Canada, Sessional Papers 1894, Paper 13, 103. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10 (Red), volume 2771, file 154845, part 1, J. G. Ramsden to J. D. McLean, 23 December 1907. [TAY-003542] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Damages for Plaintiff in Miller Vs. Ashton Case,” <em>Brantford Expositor</em>, 1 April 1914. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, Accession GS 75-403, series 2:15[a], box 16, [Illegible] Chairman, Indian and Eskimo Commission, Westgate, T. B. R., Field Secretary, Indian and Eskimo Commission, “Minutes of the Meeting of the Indian Residential School Commission held on March 18th, 1921.” [AGS-000014] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, School Files, volume 6358, file 758-1, part 1, 20 August 1919 [OLD-000497]; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6358, file 7581, part 1, “Statement taken by Constable Wright, RNWMP, 27 November 1919”; [IRC-041330] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, School Files, volume 6358, file 758-1, part 1, 20 August 1919; [OLD-000497] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6358, file 758-1, part 1, Thomas Graham to W. M. Graham, 1 December 1919; [IRC-041328] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6358, file 758-1, part 1, P. H. Gentleman to Canon Gould, 12 January 1920. [IRC-041335] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6436, file 878-1, part 1, Microfilm reel C-8762, 1890–1912, Statement of Johnny Sticks, 28 February 1902. [JOE-060004] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6267, file 580-1, part 2, J. W. Waddy to W. M. Graham, 5 October 1925. [DRS-000543-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Isabelle Whitford, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Keeseekoowenin First Nation, Manitoba, 28 May 2010, Statement Number: S-KFN-MB-01-004. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Rachel Chakasim, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Timmins, Ontario, 9 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-4-6NOV10-019. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Fred Brass, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Key First Nation, Saskatchewan, 21 January 2012, Statement Number: SP039. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Geraldine Bob, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Simpson, Northwest Territories, 23 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2685. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, William Antoine, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Little Current, Ontario, 12 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2002. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Eva Simpson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Norway House First Nation, Manitoba, 10 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0290. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Dorothy Ross, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 25 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-24NOV10-014. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Archie Hyacinthe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Kenora, Ontario, 15 March 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0279. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jonas Grandjambe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Good Hope, Northwest Territories, 15 July 2010, Statement Number: 01-NWT-JY10-024. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Delores Adolph, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Mission, British Columbia, 19 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3458. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Joseph Wabano, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Albany, Ontario, 29 January 2013, Statement Number: SP099. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Noel Starblanket, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 16 January 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3314. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mervin Mirasty, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 21 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-4391. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Nellie Trapper, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-086. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Wendy Lafond, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Batoche, Saskatchewan, 24 July 2010, Statement Number: 01-SK-18-25JY10-015. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Don Willie, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Alert Bay, British Columbia, 3 August 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3284. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Adams, “The Indians.” <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, “Native Mission School Shut Down over Discipline Controversy,” by Margaret Loewen Reimer, <em>Mennonite Reporter</em>, Volume 19, Number 22, 13 November 1989. [PHD-000143] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 372/25-13-024, volume 1, C. T. Blouin and L. Poulin, to A. R. Jolicoeur, 13 October 1970. [LTR-001178-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, GRS Files, box R2, [Name redacted], Ronald J. Pratt and Herman Blind to [Name redacted], 8 December 1993. [IRC047202-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, Hayter Reed Papers MG29, E 106, volume 18, Personnel H-L, J. W. Tims to Indian Commissioner, October 27, 1891. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, Hayter Reed Papers MG29, E 106, volume 18, Personnel H-L, L. Vankoughnet to H. Reed, 7 December 1891. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, see: Library and Archives Canada, Sifton Papers, volume 19, 12129-39; 12123, J. H. Fairlie to A. Forget, 23 August 1897; A. Forget to Sifton, 30 October 1897; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6211, file 469-1, part 3, Duncan C. Scott to B. P. Fuller, 16 November 1916. [SWK-001406] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 13356, “Investigation – Kuper Island School 1939, Police report regarding runaways from Kuper Island School,” 10 January 1939; [IRC040001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 13356, “Investigation – Kuper Island School 1939,” D. M. MacKay to Secretary, Indian Affairs Branch, Ottawa, 12 January 1939; [IRC-040007-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 13356, “Investigation – Kuper Island School 1939, Cpl S. Service, 13 January 1939; [IRC-040003] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 13356, “Investigation – Kuper Island School 1939, Confidential Notes,” Gerald H. Barry, 13 January 1939. [IRC-040010] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 13356, “Investigation – Kuper Island School 1939,” G. H. Barry to Major D. M. MacKay, 17 January 1939; [IRC-040014] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 13356, “Investigation – Kuper Island School 1939,” Harold McGill to Major D. M. MacKay, 27 January 1939. [IRC-040021] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Archival Unit – Ottawa, file 772/3-1, volume 2, 10/11–05/66, C. Pant Schmidt to Harold McGill, 17 August 1944; [IRC-047003] T. R. L. MacInnes to Director, Indian Affairs, 25 August 1944; [IRC-047005] Sarah Elizabeth Brown, “Ex-residential School Student Files Suit,” <em>Whitehorse Star</em>, 21 April 2003; Elizabeth Asp, Jackie McLaren, Jim Sheldon, Michelle Tochacek, and Ruby Van Bibber, “Bishop’s comments invalided any apology,” Letter to the Editor, <em>Whitehorse Star</em>, 11 August 1999. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6309, file 645-1, part 3, R. S. Davis, excerpt from Quarterly Report Ending March, 1945, on Touchwood Agency. [IRC-047128] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, GRS Files, box 1A, file 22, Head Teacher [Illegible] to My Lord Bishop, 10 January 1956. [IRC-040120] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, 709/25-1-001, 1951–1961, part 2, L. C. Hunter to R. F. Davey, 30 November 1960; [IRC-040054] TRC, NRA, United Church of Canada/Victoria University Archives, Acc. No. 8 [Illegible].050C, box 112, file 17, Edmonton IRS – Correspondence 1958–60/UCC Docs Toronto, Dwight Powell to E. E. M. Joblin, 25 November 1960. [UCA080215] It was not until 1968 that Indian Affairs began requiring school schools superintendents to submit the names of all who had been dismissed because they had “created problems.” TRC, NRA, National Archives of Canada, Acc. E1996-97/312, Vol. 2, File 672/25-1, R.F. Davey to All School Superintendents, 7 May 1968; [120.07885] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Burnaby Vol. 11500, File 901/1-13, pt. 1, School Establishment, 1968-1972, FA 10-138, A. H. Friesen to All District School Superintendents, 1 June 1968. [120.07891] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Burnaby Vol. 11500, File 901/1-13, pt. 1, School Establishment, 1968-1972, FA 10-138, A. H. Friesen to All District School Superintendents, 1 June 1968. [120.07891] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The details of these convictions will be outlined in a forthcoming TRC report. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Indian Residential Schools Adjudication Secretariat, Adjudication Secretariat Statistics, from September 19, 2007, to January 31, 2015, <a href="http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php">http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php</a> (accessed 20 February 2015). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joseph Jean Louis Comeau worked there from 1959 to 1965, <em>R. v. Comeau</em>, 1988 CanLII 3839 AB QB). Martin Houston worked there from 1960 to 1962, TRC, ASAGR, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, Walter Rudnicki to Director, Indian Affairs, 17 August 1962; [AANDC-234696] Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, Western Arctic Division, Division file number 628-626-1, code 0559, re: Martin Houston, 29 August 1962. [AANDC-234684] George Maczynski worked there from 1966 to 1967, TRC, NRA, Beaufort-Delta Education Council Warehouse, Inuvik, NWT, Payroll, 1959 to 1966 [box 1], M. Ruyant to Department of Northern Affairs and National Resources, Payroll list of employees at the hostel for September 1966, September 1966; [GHU-002427] Beaufort-Delta Education Council Warehouse, Inuvik, NWT, Payroll, 1967 to 1970 [box 1], Department of Northern Affairs and National Resources, Northern Administration: Paylist – Hostel, May 1967. [GHU-002435] Paul Leroux worked there from 1967 to 1979, TRC, ASAGR, Glenn Taylor, “Grollier Man Pleads Not Guilty to Sex Offences,” Northern News Services, 28 November 1997, <a href="http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-11/nov28_97sex.html">http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-11/nov28_97sex.html</a>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mandryk, “Uneasy Neighbours,” 210. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8798, file 371/25-13-019, part 2, R. F. Davey to William Starr, 19 July 1962; [FGA-001179] TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 2:15, box 24, file 3, Extract from Report on Visit of Major-General G. R. Turner to St. Paul’s Anglican Indian Residential School, Cardston, Alberta, 6–8, 1958. [AAC-090593] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mandryk, “Uneasy Neighbours,” 210. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>R. v. Plint</em>, [1995] B.C.J. No. 3060 (B.C. S.C.); “Former Employee of Residential School Jailed for Sex Abuses,” Victoria <em>Times–Colonist</em>, January 24, 2004. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jean Pierre Bellemare, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, La Tuque, Québec, 5 March 2013, Statement Number: SP104. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Andrew Yellowback, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Kamloops, British Columbia, 9 August 2009, Statement Number: 2011-5015. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, AVS, [Name redacted], Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-055; TRC, AVS, Myrna Kaminawaish, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 7 January 2011, Statement Number: 01-ON-06JA11-004; TRC, AVS, Percy Tuesday, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-083; TRC, AVS, Isaac Daniels, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-1779. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Marlene Kayseas, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 16 January 2012, Statement Number: SP035. For gifts of candy, see: TRC, AVS, Elaine Durocher, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-059; TRC, AVS, John B. Custer, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 19 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-19JU10-057; TRC, AVS, Louise Large, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, St. Paul, Alberta, 7 January 2011, Statement Number: 01-AB-06JA11-012. For field trips, see: TRC, AVS, Ben Pratt, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 18 January 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3318. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, AVS, [Name redacted], Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-055; TRC, AVS, Leona Bird, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 21 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-4415; TRC, AVS, Barbara Ann Pahpasay Skead, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-159. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Josephine Sutherland, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Timmins, Ontario, 8 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON4-6NOV10-013. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Marie Therese Kistabish, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Val d’Or, Québec, 6 February 2012, Statement Number: SP101. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Richard Morrison, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-17JU10-080. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For shower, see: TRC, AVS, Leonard Peter Alexcee, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: 2011-3228. For lunch pail, see: TRC, AVS, Mervin Mirasty, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 21 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-4391. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Donna Antoine, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Enderby, British Columbia, 13 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3287. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Helen Harry, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 20 September 2013, Statement Number: 2011-3203. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bernard Catcheway, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Skownan First Nation, Manitoba, 12 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2510; TRC, AVS, Doris Judy McKay, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Rolling River First Nation, Manitoba, 23 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2514. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Timothy Henderson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 28 June 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0291. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Nellie Ningewance, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, 1 July 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0305. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Flora Northwest, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 24 July 2013, Statement Number: SP124. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, AVS, Hazel Mary Anderson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-034; TRC, AVS, Peter Ross, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Tsiigehtchic, Northwest Territories, 8 September 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0340. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Eric Robinson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: SC093. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lynda Pahpasay McDonald, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-130. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, AVS, Larry Roger Listener, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: SP125; TRC, AVS, Mary Vivier, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC110. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Louisa Papatie, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Val d’Or, Québec, 6 February 2012, Statement Number: SP101. For an example of abuse stopping as students became older, see: Fontaine, <em>Broken Circle</em>, 18–19. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, AVS, Ken A. Littledeer, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 26 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-24NOV10-028; TRC, AVS, Sphenia Jones, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Terrace, British Columbia, 29 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3300. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lawrence Waquan, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC111. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Hazel Mary Anderson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-034. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Wayne Reindeer, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: SP125. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Michael Muskego, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-045. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Josephine Sutherland, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Timmins, Ontario, 8 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON4-6NOV10-013. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Norman Courchene, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-065. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, AVS, Ben Pratt, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 18 January 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3318; TRC, AVS, Amelia Galligos-Thomas, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3975. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Violet Rupp Cook, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Bloodvein First Nation, Manitoba, 25 January 2012, Statement Number: 2011-2565. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, AVS, Ivan George, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Mission, British Columbia, 18 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3472; TRC, AVS, Dorothy Jane Beaulieu, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Resolution, Northwest Territories, 28 April 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0379; TRC, AVS, Lorna Morgan, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-041. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ruben, “Abraham Ruben,” 136. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see: TRC, AVS, Stella Marie Tookate, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Timmins, Ontario, 9 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-810NOV10-003; TRC, AVS, Richard Hall, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: 2011-1852. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, William Garson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Split Lake First Nation, Manitoba, 24 March 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0122. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Percy Thompson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: SP125. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Alice Ruperthouse, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Val d’Or, Québec, 5 February 2012, Statement Number: SP100. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Albert Elias, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 1 July 2011, Statement Number: SC092. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Denis Morrison, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-17JU10-028. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bob Baxter, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 24 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-24NOV10-012. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Clara Quisess, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-17JU10-032. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Louisa Birote, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, La Tuque, Québec, 5 March 2013, Statement Number: SP104. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, AVS, Ruth Chapman, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-118; TRC, AVS, Gordon James Pemmican, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-0069; TRC, AVS, Mary Vivier, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-082; TRC, AVS, Roy Johnson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Dawson City, Yukon, 24 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0203; TRC, AVS, Ken Lacquette, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-052. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Agnes Moses, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 29 June 2011, Statement Number: SC090. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Don Willie, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Alert Bay, British Columbia, 3 August 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3284. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Christina Kimball, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 January 2011, Statement Number: 03-001-10-020. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Noel Starblanket, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 16 January 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3314. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Geraldine Shingoose, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 19 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-19JU10-033. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Paul Andrew, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 30 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE202. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, National Archives of Canada – Burnaby, FA 10-138, 07/1956, Perm. volume 13528, C. G. Brown, G. J. Buck, B. O. Filteau, “Report of the Educational Survey Commission on the Educational Facilities and Requirements of the Indians of Canada,” July 1956, 10. [120.18398] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, RG10, volume 8703, file 962/6-1, part 7, NAC – Ottawa, L. K. Poupore to H. M. Jones, 14 October 1957. [JOE-063234] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Departmental Library – Ottawa, “St. Michael’s Indian School Wins Service Club Trophy,” The Indian Record, April 1946. [SMD-002822] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8610, file 652/1-13, part 1, George Roussel to B. F. Neary, 25 March 1949. [SMD-001575-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8610, file 652/1-13, part 1, Geo.-L. Roussel to B. F. Neary, 25 March 1949. [SMD-001575-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marks, <em>They Call Me Chief</em>, 31. Sasakamoose played with the Chicago Blackhawks in the 1952–53 season. He was born on the Sandy Lake, Saskatchewan, reserve in 1933. TRC, NRA, INAC – Departmental Library – Ottawa, “Saskatchewan Midget Hockey Champions,” Indian Record, Volume 12, Number 5, May 1949. [SMD-002829] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG29, volume 792, file 344, Pratt, Gerry. “Little Indians Are Big Fighters,” in the <em>Vancouver Sun Magazine Supplement</em>, 31 March 1951. [NPC-600625] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Departmental Library – Ottawa, “First Winner of the Tom Longboat Trophy,” <em>The Indian Missionary Record</em>, Volume 15, Number 3, March 1952, 3. [IMR-000400] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hughes, <em>Jackson Beardy</em>, 6–7. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>MacGregor, <em>Chief</em>, 34–35. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadien, <em>From Lishamie</em>, 253–254. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadien, <em>From Lishamie</em>, 264–265. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example from the Presbyterian school at Shoal Lake, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6187, file 461-1, part 1, “Report of Inspector Semmens on the Cecilia Jaffrey [sic] Boarding School,” 22 January 1917. [IRC-048048] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 4041, file 334503, Duncan Campbell Scott to Frank Pedley, 19 February 1912, cited in Wasylow, “History of Battleford Industrial School,” 261–263. For Battleford capacity, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1907</em>, 341. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1915</em>, xxvi. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1898</em>, 297; Canada, <em>Annual Report of</em> <em>the Department of Indian Affairs, 1910</em>, 474; TRC, NRA, Provincial Archives of Alberta, PAA 71.220 B16 668, unsigned letter to J. T. McNally, 22 February 1922. [OGP-090011] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs 1906</em>, 191; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the</em> <em>Department of Indian Affairs, 1907</em>, xxxiii. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For St. Boniface closing, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1905</em>, xxxiii; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1906</em>, 191. For difficulty in recruiting, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1896</em>, 362. For Calgary closing, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1908</em>, 197. For Calgary recruiting problem, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1904</em>, 375. For Regina closing, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1910</em>, 364. For evidence of Indian Affairs’ dissatisfaction with the management of the Regina school, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6332, file 661-1, part 1, W. M. Graham to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 17 November 1910. [RLS-000027] For the Elkhorn school, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3925, file 116823-1A, Clerk of the Privy Council to Superintendent General, Indian Affairs, 18 February 1918. [ELK-000248] For the Red Deer school, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6350, file 753-1, part 1, J. F. Woodsworth to James Endicott, 5 June 1919. [EDM-000242] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The government actually closed day schools in an effort to force parents to send their children to residential schools. Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1895,</em> xxi–xii. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples of the withholding of rations, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 1629, A. J. McNeill to D. Laird, 10 December 1901; [SAR-000404] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6320, file 658-1, part 1, David Laird to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 3 April 1906; [PAR-000980-0000] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6320, file 658-1, part 1, Microfilm reel C-9802, M. Benson to Deputy Superintendent General, Indian Affairs, 21 February 1907. [120.00284] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6475, file 918-1, part 1, [Illegible], Office of the General Superintendent, Oblate Catholic Indian Missions to Philip Phelan, 21 October 1941. [FPU-000133] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, School Files, volume 6352, file 753-10, part 1, Microfilm reel C-8708, P. Phelan to J. F. Woodsworth, 22 January 1941; [EDM-003580] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 1346, Microfilm reel C-13916, G. Donckele to W. R. Robertson, 23 July 1906. [KUP-004276] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, English Language Summary of the Fort Resolution Chronicles, Volume 1, 1903–1942, 3. [GNN-000077-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, Perm. volume 6451, file 883-1, part 1, Bella Coola Agency – Kitamaat Boarding School – General Administration, 1906–1932, FA 10-17, Microfilm reel C-8773; [KMT-095676-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, Re: Kitimat Indian Reserve, Re: Hanna Grant, Deceased, 15 June 1922,” I. Fougner to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 15 June 1922. [KMT-095674] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, 773/25-1-003, 05/36–09/70, volume 1, RCAP, R. D. Ragan, “Extract from minutes of Blood Indian Council Meeting March 15, 1948.” [MRY-000302] For Charron’s initials, see: TRC, NRA, National Archives of Canada, RG29, volume 974, file 388-6-4, part 1, 02/1948–07/1949, B. F. Neary to P. A. Charron, 21 July 1948. [120.03363] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6262, file 578-1, part 4, A. Ogletree to Deputy Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs, 23 July 1926. [ELK-000331] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6371, file 764-1, part 1, M. Christianson to W. M. Graham, 28 October 1927. [PUL-001008] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6445, file 881-10, part 5, Agent’s Report on Stuart Lake Agency for September, Robert Howe, 2 October 1940. [LEJ-002079] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples from British Columbia, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6445, file 881-10, part 6, Report of Corporal L. F. Fielder, 14 October 1943; [LEJ-001389] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, RG10, volume 6443, file 881-1, part 2, R. Howe to Indian Affairs Branch, 12 September 1946; [LEJ-000855] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6445, file 881-10, part 7, R. Howe to Indian Affairs, 7 October 1946. [LEJ-001830] For Manitoba example, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 501/25-1-076, volume 1, A. G. Hamilton to Indian Affairs, 4 November 1943. [SBR-000408] For Saskatchewan examples, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6302, file 650-10, part 3, R. A. Hoey to J. P. B. Ostrander, 11 September 1942; [BVL-000433] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 9148, file 309-11 ACE, John Baptiste, Peter King, and Alex Sapp to Indian Agent, Battleford, 31 August 1945. [PAR-000897-0002] For Alberta examples, see: TRC, NRA, National Capital Regional Service Centre – LAC – Ottawa, file 1/18-24, volume 1 (locator #X-46-4), Rev. L. C. Schmidt to Harold McGill, 2 July 1943; [NCA-014258] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6374, file 764-10, part 2, PARC, H. A. R. Gagnon to Director, Indian Affairs Branch, 12 October 1945; [PUL-009517-0000] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6355, file 757-1, part 2, 1928–1948, John E. Pugh to Indian Affairs, 8 October 1947; [MOR-005548] TRC, NRA, Provincial Archives – Alberta, PAA 71.220 B94 3972, Principal Ermineskin Indian Residential School to Indian Affairs Branch, 31 March 1948; [OGP-032546] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6374, file 764-10, part 2, PARC, J. E. Pugh to Indian Affairs Branch, 7 March 1946; [PUL-009511] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Edmonton, 103/6-1-764, volume 1, 09/44–12/54, C. A. F. Clark to Superintendent of Education, 9 November 1949; [IRC-048180] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 773/25-1-003, volume 1, 10/36–09/70, “Minutes of the Blood Band Council Held in The Indian Agency Office,” 22 November 1949, annotated by C. A. F. Clark. [IRC-041373] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6467, file 889-1, part 1, 12/1894–11/1933, Vancouver Agency – Squamish Residential School – General Administration, FA 10-17, Microfilm reel C-8785, NAC, Ottawa, A. W. Vowell to the Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs, 5 April 1905. [SQU-000423] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6270, file 582-1, part 1, “Extract from report on meeting Chief of Pine Creek Band,” A. Ogletree, Indian Agent, 16 June 1917. [PCR-010082] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example from Morley, Alberta, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, NAC – Ottawa, 772/3-6, volume 1, dates 1940–1954, Minutes from the council meeting for the Stony Indian Agency, 15 October 1946, 3. [MOR-006118] For an example from Lestock, Saskatchewan, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8756, file 673/25-1-003, 25 August 1949. [MRS-046113-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8756, file 673/25-1-003, J. P. B. Ostrander to Neary, 24 January 1950. [MRS-046113-0005] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example from the Presbyterian school at Shoal Lake, Ontario, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6187, file 461-1, part 1, Chief Kesik, Chief Redsky, and three others to McKenzie, 28 March 1917. [CJC-000006-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6187, file 461, part 1, “Report of the Commission of Presbytery appointed to investigate conditions at ‘Cecilia Jeffries [sic] Boarding School,’” 26 February 1918. [CJC-000847-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6187, file 461-1, part 1, “Report of the Commission of Presbytery appointed to investigate conditions at ‘Cecilia Jeffries [sic] Boarding School,’” 26 February 1918. [CJC-000847-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, volume 6332, file 661-1, part 2, petition from parents to Crooked Lakes Agency, 25 July 1949. [IRC-041159] Although Indian Affairs official J. P. B. Ostrander opposed replacing the teacher, he did report that she kept a strap on display in her class. He said, “If she does not use it for punishment, at least she keeps it on display as a threat of punishment, which does not promote harmony in the classroom.” TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, volume 6332, file 661-1, part 2, J. P. B. Ostrander to Indian Affairs Branch, Department of Mines and Resources, 12 August 1949. [RLS-000512-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6187, file 461-1, part 2, Mr. Paget to Mr. Ferrier, 21 August 1928. [CJC-001354] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6254, file 575-10, part 1, A. G. Smith to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 29 December 1936. [BIR-002631] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of a request for an investigation into a death, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6332, file 661-1, part 2, Garnet Neff to T. G. Murphy, 26 January 1935; [RLS-000366-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG29, volume 2917, file 851-1-A673, part 1, Memorandum to Mr. McLean, 13 January 1914. [NPC-603178] For an example of a complaint regarding discipline, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6200, file 466-1, part 3, H. H. Craig to H. A. Snell, 29 July 1937. [MSC-000080-0001] For an example of working on behalf of an injured student, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 3, William Hall to Indian Affairs, 30 April 1936. [PLD-000746] For an example of seeking a discharge, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, volume 12333, box 19, part 1, 1936–1939, NAC, J. D. Caldwell to [Severed], 16 March 1939. [KUP-004496] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, RG85, volume 1505, file 600-1-1, part 1, N.W.T. – General Policy File – Education and Schools, 1905–1944, Extract From Act. Sgt. G. T. Makinson’s Report-Resolution, N.W.T., 3 July 1937. [FRU-010059] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cuthand, “Native Peoples,” 382–383; Kulchyski, “Considerable Unrest,” 100. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Goodwill and Sluman, <em>John Tootoosis</em>, 155. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Goodwill and Sluman, <em>John Tootoosis,</em> 156. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Both the 1905 fire at the Saint-Paul-des-Métis, Alberta, school and the 1930 fire at the Cross Lake, Manitoba, school were set by students. The Saint-Paul fire resulted in one death; the Cross Lake fire, in thirteen deaths. For the Saint-Paul fire, see: Stanley, “Alberta’s Half-Breed Reserve,” 96–98. For the Cross Lake fire, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6260, file 577-1, part 1, J. L. Fuller to A. McNamara, 8 March 1930; [CLD-000933-0000] William Gordon to Assistant Deputy and Secretary, Indian Affairs, 10 March 1930. [CLD-000934] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wilson,<em>Missionary work</em>,167–170. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6032, file 150-40A, part 1, “Regulations Relating to the Education of Indian Children” (Ottawa: Government Printing Bureau, 1894). [AGA-001516-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for examples: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1893</em>, 104; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1902</em>, 423. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6258, file 576-10, part 9, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, Re: Thomas ‘Tommy’ Linklater et al.,” 23 September 1936; [BRS-000240-0006] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6258, file 576-10, part 9, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report Re: Thomas ‘Tommy’ Linklater et al.,” 20 October 1936; [BRS-000240-0005] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6209, file 468-10, part 2, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, Re: Abner Elliott and Leonard Beeswax, truants,” 13 October 1938. [MER-001043-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6209, file 468-10, part 2, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, Re: Abner Elliott and Leonard Beeswax, truants,” 11 January 1939. [MER-001048-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Duncan Sticks, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6436, file 878-1, part 1, Statement of Reverend Henry Boening, 3 March 1902; [IRC-047093] Statement of Joseph Fahey, 3 March 1903; [IRC-047092] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6436, file 878-1, part 1, Statement of Antonio Boitano, 1 March 1902. [IRC-047086] For William Cardinal, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3921, file 116818-1B, J. F. Woodsworth to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 25 November 1918. [EDM-000956] For unnamed boy from The Pas, Manitoba, school, see: TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives Anglican Church of Canada GS 75-103, B17, “Minutes of meeting of Indian and Eskimo Commission, M.S.C.C., Held on Tuesday, January 11th, 1927,” 11. [AAC-083001] For three unnamed boys from the Fort Alexander, Manitoba, school, see: St. Boniface Historical Society, Archives Deschâtelets, L 541 M27L 266, Brachet to père provincial, 20 October 1928. For Agnes Ben, see: “Find Body of Indian Girl, Long Missing,” <em>Winnipeg Free Press</em>, 17 April 1930. For Percy Ochapowace, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6332, file 661-1, part 2, Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, “Re: Percy Ochapowace – Death of, Ochapowace Indian Reserve, Saskatchewan,” H. S. Casswell, 19 January 1935; [RLS-000365-0003] J. P. B. Ostrander to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 19 January 1935. [RLS-000365-0001] For Allen Patrick, Andrew Paul, Justa Maurice, and John Jack, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6446, file 881-23, part 1, R. H. Moore to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 6 January 1937. [LEJ-004083-0000] For Andrew Gordon, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 9151, file 312-11 ACE, “Royal Mounted Police Report, Re Andrew Gordon (Juvenile), Deceased,” 16 March 1939. [GDC-009280-0001] For John Kioki, Michael Sutherland, and Michael Matinas, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6186, file 460-23, part 1, Paul Langlois to Constable Dexter, 14 June 1941. [FTA-000105-0001] For Leonard Major, Ambrose Alexander, and Alec Francis, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, file 882-2, part 8, Kamloops Agency – Kamloops Residential School – Quarterly Returns, 1947–1952, FA 10-17, volume 6447, Microfilm reel C-8770, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, Indian Residential School Quarterly Return for Kamloops Indian Residential School, 30 September 1947, pages 8, 9, and 10 of 20-page portable document file; [KAM-002274] TRC, ASAGR, RCMP-564517, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, E-Div NIRS task force Final Report, M. W. Pacholuk, “Final Report of the Native Indian Residential School Task Force, Project E-NIRS,” Royal Canadian Mounted Police, 49. [AGCA-564517] For Albert Nepinak, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6272, file 582-23, part 1, Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, 9 April 1951. [PCR-000190] For Tom and Charles Ombash, see: TRC, NRA, National Capital Regional Service Centre – LAC – Ottawa, file 494/3-3-3, volume 1, “Provincial Police Report,” G. A. McMonagle, 19 December 1956. [PLK-001205-0001] For Beverly Joseph and Patricia Joseph, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 961/25-2, volume 15, Admissions and Discharges – Kuper Island Residence, Cowichan Agency, B.C., 01/08/1958–02/07/1966, Control No. 34-15 IRSRC – Historical Files, J. V. Boys to Indian Commissioner for B.C., 29 January 1959. [KUP-200601] For Mabel Crane Bear and Belinda Raw Eater, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Edmonton, 772/25-1, volume 1, 04/60–06/70, N. Goater to A. H. Murray, 10 March 1962. [OLD-007287-0005] For Alfred Whitehawk, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Edmonton, RG10, Acc. E1996-97/415, box 36, file 25-2-662, 1964–1966, E. Turenne to K. Kerr, 6 June 1965. [SPR-006307] For Charles Wenjack, see: TRC, NRA, The Presbyterian Church in Canada Archives, Toronto, On., Acc. 1988-7004, box 17, file 4, “Inquest Hears Tragic Tale of Runaway Boy,” <em>Kenora Miner and News</em>, 18 November 1966; Coroner’s Statement Upon Issuing His Warrant for Holding an Inquest in the Case of Charles Wenjack, R. Glenn Davidson, 4 November 1966; Report of Post-Mortem Examination, A-258, Charles Wenjack, 23 October 1966, Dr. Peter Pan; Adams, “The Lonely Death,” 30–44. [CJC-007909] For Joseph Commanda, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 451/25-2-004, volume 2, “Report on the Death of Joseph Commanda,” H. B. Rodine, 6 September 1968. [TAY-001114-0001] For Philip Swain and Roderick Keesick, see: TRC, NRA, INAC, file 487/18-2, volume 1, “2 Boys Died from Exposure,” <em>Kenora Miner and News</em>, 18 December 1970; [KNR-003158-0002] P. J. Hare to Indian Affairs, 7 December 1970. [KNR-003168] For Jack Elanik and Dennis Dick, see: TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, Diocese of the Arctic, General Synod Archives, file 110-09, Stringer Hall, Accession M96-7, series 2:1, Notice of missing boys, 1972; [AGS-000341] TRC, NRA, Government of Northwest Territories Archives Confidential, Hostels, 1971–1974, Archival box 8-24, Archival Acc. G1995-004, Leonard Holman to J. Coady, 14 July 1972. [SHU-000486] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples of cases where criticism was directed against school authorities for the handling of runaways, including cases that led to fatalities, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6436, file 878-1, part 1, Statement of Reverend Henry Boening, 3 March 1902; [IRC-047093] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6436, file 878-1, part 1, Statement of Reverend Henry Boening, Statement of Joseph Fahey, 3 March 1903; [IRC-047092] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6267, file 580-1, part 2, W. G. Tweddell to W. M. Graham, 6 May 1931; [DRS-000588] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6332, file 661-1, part 2, Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, “Re: Percy Ochapowace – Death of, Ochapowace Indian Reserve, Saskatchewan,” H. S. Casswell, 19 January 1935; [RLS-000365-0003] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6332, file 661-1, part 2, J. P. B. Ostrander to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 19 January 1935; [RLS-000365-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6446, file 881-23, part 1, R. H. Moore to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 6 January 1937; [LEJ-004083-0000] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6309, file 654-1, part 2, “Memorandum of an inquiry into the cause and circumstances of the death of Andrew Gordon,” R. W. Frayling, 11 March 1939; [GDC-028479] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 11553, file 312-11, “Indian Boy Frozen on Bush Trail,” <em>Regina Leader-Post</em>, 16 March 1939; [GDC-009281] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 9151, file 312-11 ACE, “Royal Mounted Police Report, Re Andrew Gordon (Juvenile), Deceased,” 16 March 1939; [GDC-009280-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6278, file 584-10, part 2, Police Report, G. N. McRae, 23 April 1940; [SBR-110686-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6278, file 584-10, part 2, Police Report, G. L. Tisdale, 30 April 1940; [SBR-110686-0002] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6186, file 460-23, part 1, Paul Langlois to Constable Dexter, 14 June 1941; [FTA-000105-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6186, file 460-23, part 1, “Statement of Charles Kioki,” 22 June 1942; [FTA-000116-0013] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6320, file 657-10, part 2, Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, J. P. Douglas, 7 October 1944; [MDD-001704] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6320, file 657-10, part 2, Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, T. H. Playford, 10 October 1944; [MDD-002258] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6272, file 582-23, part 1, Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, 9 April 1951; [PCR-000190] TRC, NRA, National Capital Regional Service Centre – LAC – Ottawa, file 487/18-24, volume 1, L. A. Marshall to Indian Affairs, 20 December 1954; [KNR-001380-0003] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 961/25-2, volume 15, Admissions and Discharges – Kuper Island Residence, Cowichan Agency, B.C., 01/08/1958– 02/07/1966, Control no. 34-15 IRSRC – Historical Files, J. V. Boys to Indian Commissioner for B.C., 29 January 1959; [KUP-200601] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Edmonton, 772/25-1, volume 1, 04/60–06/70, N. Goater to A. H. Murray, 10 March 1962; [OLD-007287-0005] TRC, NRA, INAC, file 487/18-2, volume 1, “2 Boys Died from Exposure,” <em>Kenora Miner and News</em>, 18 December 1970; [KNR-003158-0002] TRC, NRA, INAC, file 487/18-2, volume 1, P. J. Hare to Indian Affairs, 7 December 1970. [KNR-003168] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the reporting to the Ontario Provincial Police, see: TRC, NRA, National Capital Regional Ser-vice Centre – LAC – Ottawa, file 494/3-3-3, volume 1, “Provincial Police Report,” G. A. McMonagle, 19 December 1956. [PLK-001205-0001] For the reporting to Indian Affairs, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8275, file 494/6-1-014, part 5, R. F. Davey to G. Swartman, 13 November 1956. [PLK-000488] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Porter, “Remains Found Near Residential School Are ‘Non-human,’” <em>CBC News</em>, 12 July 2012, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/remains-found-near-residential-school-are-non-human-1.1249599">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/remains-found-near-residential-school-are-non-human-1.1249599</a>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 1/25-1-5-2, volume 1, “Regulations With Respect to Teaching, Education, Inspection, and Discipline for Indian Residential Schools, Made and Established for the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs Pursu-ant to Paragraph (a) of Section 114 of the Indian Act,” 20 January 1953. [PAR-001203-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 901/25-13, volume 4 (locator 156-2), J. B. Bergevin to H. B. Cotnam, 1 March 1971. [NCA-012545-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example from Chilliwack, British Columbia, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6422, file 869-1, part 1, Microfilm reel C-8754, J. Hall to F. Devlin, 19 January 1900. [COQ-000345] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6308, file 653-10, part 1, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report Re: Douglas Shingoose and Donald Stevenson,” 23 February 1935. [FHR-001050-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for examples: North-West Mounted Police, <em>Annual Report, 1894</em>, 52–53; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3920, file 116818, C. E. Somerset to Indian Commissioner, 6 October 1896; [EDM-009788] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 2771, file 154845, part 1, Mohawk Institute to Hayter Reed, 18 March 1896; [TAY-003510] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6278, file 584-10, part 1, “RCMP Report regarding [Name redacted],” 16 October 1933. [SBR-110565-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sutherland, <em>Children in English-Canadian Society,</em> 122. For examples of prosecutions, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6278, file 584-10, part 1, A. H. L. Mellor to Deputy Superintendent General, Indian Affairs, 19 September 1935; [SBR-110607-0000] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6209, file 468-10, part 1, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police report, Re: [Names redacted],” 21 November 1937; [MER-000580-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6193, file 462-10, part 3, A. D. Moore to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 16 September 1940. [CRS-000507-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police’s being used to return students to school, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6330, file 660-10, part 1, R. W. Greatwood to Indian Affairs, 11 April 1930; [PLD-003278-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6330, file 660-10, part 2, H. E. P. Mann to Commissioner, RCMP, 6 February 1934; [PLD-003316-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6193, file 462-10, part 1, page 1/1, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report,” 11 February 1935, C. Graham; [CRS-001237-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6275, file 583-10, part 1, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report, Re: Frank Puckina or Edwards,” 15 September 1939; [PLP-000374] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6304, file 651-10, part 1, Constable G. J. Mitchell, 9 September 1931. [MRS-045402-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Untitled document, purportedly Chronologie Dépuis Leur Foundations, École Blue Quills (Daily Journal from their Founding, Grey Nuns at Blue Quills) 1931–1936, entry for 1 May 1932. [GNA-000404] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6278, file 584-10, part 1, “RCMP’s Report on Truant,” Constable R. D. Toews, 23 October 1936; [SBR-110630-0001] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6278, file 584-10, part 1, Constable R. D. Toews, 8 May 1937. [SBR-110645-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6258, file 576-10, part 9, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report Re: Wallace Hahawahi, Delinquent,” 28 October 1936. [BRS-000240-0004] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6258, file 576-10, part 9, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report Re: Kenneth Thompson, Runaway Boy,” 28 October 1936. [BRS-000240-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6258, file 576-10, part 9, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report Re: Peter Ryder Runaway Boy,” 28 October 1936. [BRS-000240-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6267, file 580-1, part 2, J. Waddy, 24 November 1928. [DRS-000564] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6253, file 575-5, part 5, A. G. Hamilton to Indian Affairs, November 4, 1935. [BIR-000208] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6057, file 265-10, part 1, J. P. Mackey to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 16 July 1937; [SRS-006077] J. P. Mackey to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 27 July 1937. [SRS-006079] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6057, file 265-10, part 2, “Royal Canadian Mounted Police Report Re: Steven LaBobe,” 15 October 1938. [SRS-006090-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6053, file 260-10, part 1, J. P. Mackey to W. J. Cameron, 21 March 1939; [SRS-007977] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6053, file 260-10, part 1, J. P. Mackey to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 14 April 1939. [SRS-007980] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ken Lacquette, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-052. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Anthony Wilson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Terrace, British Columbia, 30 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3303. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Arthur Ron McKay, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-044. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ivan George, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Mission, British Columbia, 18 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-3472. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Muriel Morrisseau, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-057. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Isaac Daniels, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-1779. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Dora Necan, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Ignace, Ontario, 3 June 2011, Statement Number: 2011-1503. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Nellie Cournoyea, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 28 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE105. Cournoyea later went on to lead the negotiation of the first comprehensive land rights agreement in the Northwest Territories for her Inuvialuit people, and later became the first Aboriginal and female premier in Canada. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lawrence Waquan, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC111. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Beverley Anne Machelle, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Whitehorse, Yukon, 27 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-1133. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC, file 494/18-28, volume 1, G. Swartman to Indian Affairs Branch, 12 May 1955. [PLK-002025] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mel H. Buffalo, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 24 July 2013, Statement Number: SP124. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1907</em>, 189. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Church of Canada Archives, Toronto, Archive accession information: Fonds, 3282: John Chantler McDougall Fonds, 1986.291C, box 1, file 8, Mrs. J. McDougall, “Founding of the McDougall Orphanage and Training School,” Historical Sketch, no date. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Coccola, <em>They Call Me Father,</em> 89. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stocken, <em>Among the Blackfoot,</em> 1–2. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kelm, “Introduction” to Butcher, <em>Letters of Margaret Butcher</em>, xi, xxvi. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Butcher, <em>Letters of Margaret Butcher,</em> 5. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lorraine Arbez, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-007. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Noreen Fischbuch, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Beaver Mines, Alberta, 3 August 2011, Statement Number: 2011-1692. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, George Takashima, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, 3 August 2011, Statement Number: 2011-1700. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3938, file 121607, Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs to A. E. Forget, Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs, NWT, 18 January 1895. [RIS-000385-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 2100, file 17960, part 2, A. Sutherland to Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 31 March 1887. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8843, file 709/16-2-001, part 1, C. H. Birdsall to Dr. Dorey, 2 June 1948. [EDM-000371] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, H. F. Dunlop to P. Phelan, 4 November 1948. [SEC-000063] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, A. Noonan to L. K. Poupore, 27 November 1960. [CIS-000553] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, file 883-1, part 1, Bella Coola Agency – Kitamaat Boarding School – General Administration, 1906–1932, FA 10-17, Perm. volume 6451, Microfilm reel C-8773, Library and Archives Canada, L. Spotton to C. G. Young, 28 February 1930. [KMT-095721] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6377, file 767-1, part 1, M. Christianson to H. W. McGill, 2 August 1933. [JON-000073] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fast, “Amelia Le Soeur (Yeomans),” <a href="http://www.biographi.ca/009004-119.01-e.php?BioId=41653">http://www.biographi.ca/009004-119.01-e.php?BioId=41653</a> (accessed 26 May 2013); Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1900</em>, 109; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1901</em>, 80. (Charlotte Amelia’s name is mistakenly given as Annie in the annual report.) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Theresa Reid, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Powell River, British Columbia, 28 September 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0263. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, George Takashima, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, 3 August 2011, Statement Number: 2011-1700. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Olive Saunders, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 7 and 8 March 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0042. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Provincial Archives Alberta, PAA 71.220 B161 2357, E. O. Drouin to Chief Shot on Both Sides and Blood Band Council, Indian Agency, Cardston, 27 December 1966. [OGP-022362] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regina principal A. J. McLeod (1900), TRC, NRA, The United Church of Canada Archives, Toronto, Acc. No. 1979.199C, box 2, file 20, Alex Skene to Mr. McKay, 1 December 1900; [RIS-000436] Muncey, Ontario, principal W. W. Shepherd (died after a horse-drawn cart accident in 1903), TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6205, file 468-1, part 1, R. G. Howes to Deputy Superintendent General, 25 May 1903; [MER-000331] Regina principal J. A. Sinclair (1905), TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3927, file 116836-1A, Frank Pedley to W. M. Graham, 16 January 1905; [RIS-000090] Mission, British Columbia, principal Charles Marchal (diphtheria, 1906), TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6468, file 890-1, part 1, Microfilm reel C-8786, A. W. Vowell to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 10 October 1906; [MIS-004766] Onion Lake, Saskatchewan, Anglican school principal John Matheson (1916), TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6320, file 658-1, part 1, W. Sibbald to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 28 August 1916; [PAR-003569] Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan, principal Joseph Hugonnard (1917), RG10, volume 6327, file 660-1, part 1, M. Kalmes to Duncan C. Scott, 13 February 1917; [PLD-000005] Shoal Lake, Ontario, principal Mr. Mathews (influenza, 1918), TRC, NRA, RG10, volume 6187, file 461-1, part 1, R. S. McKenzie to Assistant Deputy and Secretary, 23 October 1918; [CJC-000870] High River, Alberta, principal George Nordmann (influenza, 1918), Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 3933, file 117657-1, A. Naessens to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 7 January 1919; Gordon’s, Saskatchewan, principal H. W. Atwater (1925), TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file E4974-02016, volume 4, T. J. Davies to Mr. Moore, 25 November 1925; [GDC-002528] Beauval, Saskatchewan, principal Mederic Adam (typhoid, 1930), TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6300, file 650-1, part 1, O. Charlebois to Duncan Scott, 28 October 1930; [BVL-000005] Grayson, Saskatchewan, principal J. Carriere (1933), TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6303, file 651-1, part 1, A. F. MacKenzie to J. P. B. Ostrander, 3 July 1933; [MRS-001401] Kamsack, Saskatchewan, principal C. Brouillet (1935), TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6334, file 662-1, part 2, A. F. MacKenzie to W. Murison, 14 February 1935. [SPR-000465] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 1346, Microfilm reel C-13916, G. Donckele to W. R. Robertson, 1 January 1907; [KUP-004280] RG10, FA 10-1, volume 1346, Microfilm reel C-13916, Cowichan Agency – Incoming Correspondence re Kuper Island Industrial School, 1891–1907, P. Claessen to W. R. Robertson, 5 June 1907. [KUP-022198] For A. J. McLeod’s initials, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1900</em>, 383. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada Archives, Diocese of the Arctic, M96-7, box 188, “File 8, Collected Material – Bessie Quirt, Articles written by Bessie re: Shingle Point and Fort George” “RE: First Eskimo Residential School (Anglican) – Shingle Point. Story One – Fifty Years Ago – August 1929–1979”; Library and Archives Canada, RG919-10, part 1, Fort Norman Agency – Aklavik Church of England Residential School – Admissions and Discharges, 1936–1946, FA 10-17, Perm. volume 6477, Microfilm reel C-8792, H. S. Shepherd to Philip Phelan, 30 March 1939; [ASU-001138] RG29, volume 2906, file 851-1-A486, part 3, H. S. Shepherd to P. E. Moore, 14 January 1948; [NPC-603247] RG10, volume 10728, file 484/25-2-467, part 1, H. S. Shepherd to J. L. Whitey, 17 November 1952; [MFI-001074] Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 2.15, box 22, file 2, “Minutes of a Meeting of the Sub-Executive Committee MSCC,” 8th September 1954; [AAC-090761]Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives GS 75-103, series 2-15, box 22, “Report of the Superintendent, Indian School Administration, to the M.S.C.C. Board of Management, Toronto, November 16th, 1954.” [GDC-007201] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6430, file 876-1, part 1, West Coast Agency – Ahousaht Residential School – General Administration, 1901–1931, FA 10-17, Microfilm reel C-8759, W. R. Woods to Dr. Young, 5 November 1929. [AST-200068-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Methodist Church of Canada, British Columbia Conference, Port Simpson District, Ministerial Sessions, 1893, 188, quoted in Bolt, <em>Thomas Crosby,</em> 63. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, RG10, volume 8803, file 959/25-13, part 2, Henry Cook to Frank Howard, 29 March 1960. [MIK-002122] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, O.M.I. House – Vancouver, box 39, Fort St. John–Kakawis Family Development, folder 20, Kakawis Correspondence 1942–1979, Series One Plus Finding Aid, B.C./Yukon Local Community of O.M.I. Lacombe Canada Province [formerly St. Paul’s Province], Mary Gemma to M. Kearney, 3 February 1958. [CST-800117] For background on the Benedictine Sisters of Mount Angel, see: The Benedictine Sisters of Mount Angel, “About Us, A Brief History of the Benedictine Sisters of Mt. Angel,” <a href="http://www.benedictine-srs.org/history.html">http://www.benedictine-srs.org/history.html</a> (accessed 12 June 2014). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG55, FA 55-22, Acc. 1980-81/069, box 118, file 1105, part 2, Rates of Pay &amp; Conditions of Employment of Teachers, 1964–1965, R. F. Davey to Peter Fillipoff, 25 May 1965. [AEMR-150636] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bruno-Jofre, <em>Missionary Oblate Sisters,</em> 4–12, 132–139; Choquette, <em>Canada’s Religions,</em> 83–84, 201; McCarthy, <em>From the Great River,</em> 156; Gresko, “Gender and Mission,” 9; Huel, <em>Proclaiming the Gospel,</em> 165–166, 171; Shanahan, <em>Jesuit Residential School,</em> 5; TRC, NRA, Provincial Archives – Alberta, Acc. 78.204/5, Vital Grandin to Mother Ste. Marie, 27 September 1890; [ORC-000775] No document location, no document file source, Victor Rassier to Gerald Murphy, 15 September 1930; [BVT-000239] No document location, no document file source, M. Agatha, to Gerald Murray, 26 May 1931; [BVT-000260] TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6276, file 584-3, part 1, H. B. Rayner to W. M. Graham, 26 August 1931. [SBR-000879-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, CAR, United Church Archives, Presbyterian Church in Canada, Board of Foreign Missions, Records Pertaining to Missions to Aboriginal People in Manitoba and the North West, 79.199C, box 3, file 29, (C0990), Austin McKitrick to Dr. R. P. MacKay, 30 September 1901, quoted in Hildebrand, “Staff Perspectives,” 170. [13d-c000990-d0017-001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gagan, <em>Sensitive Independence</em>, 201. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1906</em>, 2:52–56. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Grant, “Two-Thirds of the Revenue,” 108–109. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example, see: Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1893</em>, 172. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, file 886-24, part 1, Skeena River Agency – Crosby Girls Residential School [Port Simpson] – Audit Reports 1935–1948, FA 10-17, Perm. volume 6458, Microfilm reel C-8779; Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, “Crosby Girls’ Home, United Church of Canada, Cost of Operations for Fiscal Year 1934–35.” [PSM-200049-0003] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8845, file 963/16-2, part 1, July 3, 1936, Re: Kamloops Residential School, Roman Catholic. [KAM-002000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Anglican Diocese of Cariboo Archives Section #205, St. George Indian Residential School, Card D.C. 2C11, Lytton-St.-George’s School, #88.44, “All Saints Indian Residential School Staff Manual 2nd Revision, 1967, Mr. A. W. Harding, Vice-Principal,” 26–27. [AEMR-177341] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1896</em>, 366. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 9:08, box 131, file 5-3, “The Indian Residential School Commission of the Mission Society of the Church of England in Canada, An Outline of the Duties of Those Who Occupy Positions on the Staff at the Society’s Indian Residential Schools, No. III, The Teacher.” [AAC-090142] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6462, file 888-1, part 1, H, EGN-007951, F. J. C. Ball to D. C. Scott, 5 May 1921. [GRG-022150-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6028, file 118-7-1, part 1, E. B. Glass to Dr. Sutherland, 4 September 1896. [WFL-000648-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hare and Barman, “Good Intentions,” 168, 205, 206, 216. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Buck, <em>Doctor Rode Side-Saddle,</em> 114, 133. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Buck, <em>Doctor Rode Side-Saddle,</em> 92. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brandon, Manitoba, principal T. Ferrier in 1903; Mount Elgin, Ontario, principal S. R. McVitty in 1913; and Kuper Island, British Columbia, principal W. Lemmens in 1915—all used the word “evil” in describing tendencies in Aboriginal culture. Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1903</em>, 342–343; TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6205, file 468-1, part 1, Public Archives Canada, S. R. McVitty, “Helping the Indian: How it Is Done at Mount Elgin Industrial Institute,” <em>The Christian Guardian</em>, 31 May 1913; [MER-0376] RG10, volume 1347, Microfilm reel C-13916, W. Lemmens to W. R. Robertson, 10 February 1915. [KUP-004240] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example, <em>Algoma Missionary News</em> (April 1877): 14, quoted in Wilson, “Note on Shingwauk Industrial Home,” 69; Butcher, <em>Letters of Margaret Butcher,</em> 26. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6057, file 265-10, part 1, J. P. Mackey to Father MacNeil, 5 October 1936. [SRS-000280-0003] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bush, <em>Western Challenge,</em> 27. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fisher, <em>Contact and Conflict,</em> 185–188; Usher, <em>William Duncan,</em> 126. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, MSCC, GS 75-103, series 2-15, box 29, file 10, Anglican document no. 52.63, Victoria Ketcheson and Patricia Watson, 29 November 1952. [PAR-001992] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Document location to be determined, Hance/Aleck/Michell – Anglican Church of Canada and Anglican Church of Cariboo List of Documents, Helen Clafton to Bishop Dean, 5 March 1957. [ANG-063238] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1930</em>, 17. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6200, file 466-1, part 2, “Successful Graduates.” [TAY-004294-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 2006, file 7825-1A, “Report on the Mohawk Institute and Six Nations Board School,” 30 August 1895, 43. [TAY-003821-0000] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6200, file 466-1, part 2, A. F. MacKenzie to H. W. Snell, 7 May 1936. [TAY-003085-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1903</em>, 402. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, United Church of Canada Archives, Acc. No. 1979.199C, box 5, file 60, J. A. Sinclair to R. P. MacKay, 26 April 1904. [RIS-000306] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6255, file 576-1, part 2, J. Doyle to Secretary, Indian Affairs, 14 September 1932. [BRS-000234] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1960</em>, 56. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Stanley McKay, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 13 July 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0269 <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kirkness, <em>Creating Space</em>, 3–12, 29–40. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kirkness, <em>Creating Space</em>, 29–30. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, file 494/1-13-014, volume 1, T. B. Jones to R. F. Davey, 21 June 1963. [PLK-001867] For Spence as a residential school student, see: Canada, Special Joint Committee, 1947, 1066–1067. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 494/25-1-014, volume 2, “The Anglican Indian Residential School, Sioux Lookout, Ontario,” 10 June 1965. [PLK000304-0001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 487/25-1-014, R. F. Davey to Giollo Kelly, 10 June 1966. [CJC-000308] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, The Presbyterian Church in Canada Archives, Toronto, ON, Acc. 1988-7004, box 43, file 4, Giollo Kelly to Mrs. Colin Wasacase, 8 July 1966. [NCA-009161-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For Mission, see: TRC, NRA, “Historic Transfer of Authority,” <em>Fraser Valley Record</em>, 5 September 1973. [OMS-000307] For Kamloops, see: TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Burnaby, RG10, FA 10-138, Acc. v85-86/353, file 963/1-13, Perm. volume 6 [502372], part 1, Student Residence Es-tablishment, 1969–78, NAC – Burnaby, A. H. Friesen to A. H. Noonan, 18 April 1973. [KAM-008144] For Blue Quills, Alberta, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 779/25-2-009, volume 1 (Ctrl #55-4), “Confidential: Notes: Re Blue Quills,” undated. [NCA-007302] For Prince Albert, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 601/25-13-1, J. B. Freeman to James A. Roberts, 2 April 1973. [PAR-019374] For Duck Lake, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, GRS Files, box 8A, file 15, D. Seesequasis to H. Kolakowski, 3 February 1982. [GDC-014654-0004] For Qu’Appelle, see: LaRose, “Wrecker’s ball Claims White Calf Collegiate,” <a href="http://www.ammsa.com/publications/saskatchewan-sage/wreckers-ball-claims-white-calf-collegiate-0">http://www.ammsa.com/publications/saskatchewan-sage/wreckers-ball-claims-white-calf-collegiate-0</a>. For Fort George, see: TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 371/25-1-019, volume 2, Right Rev. James A. Watton to A. Gill, 7 September 1971. [FGA-000225-0001] TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, NCR-E4974-1 (Encl 1), volume 3, (Ctrl #446-19), Saskatchewan Region, Student Residences: An Issue Manage-ment Discussion Paper, 8 February 1994. [NCA-016023-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, NCR-E4974-1 (Encl 1), volume 3, (Ctrl #446-19), Saskatchewan Region, Student Residences: An Issue Management Discussion Paper, 8 February 1994. [NCA-016023-0002] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod Archives, file 1, Visit Reports of the Super-intendent 02/54–12/54, pg. 004126-004227, Accession GS 75-103, series 2:15, box 24, “Superinten-dent’s Visit to Chooutla School, Carcross, Y.T., December 3th–6th, 1954.” [DYK-201620] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, CAR, General Synod of the Anglican Church of Canada Archives, Archive accession in-formation: MSSC Indian School Administration, Visit Reports, 1954–62, file 2 (1955–56), “Su-perintendent’s Visit to St. John’s Residential School, Wabasca, Alberta, 26th August, 1956.” [13a-c000034-d0002-022] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>General Synod of the Anglican Church of Canada Archives, Missionary Society of the Church of England in Canada, Indian School Administration – Visit Reports, Committees, Textual Records, 1903–1968, Indian and Eskimo Residential Schools and Indian School Administration, 1921–1977, GS75-103, box 23, file 10, “Superintendent’s Visit to St. Philip’s School, Fort George – March 24–25,” 1953. [13a-c000032-d0025-001] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, CAR, The General Synod of the Anglican Church of Canada Archives, ACC-MSCC-GS 75-103, series 2:15, box 24, file 2, Superintendent’s Visit to St. Philip’s School, Fort George, P.Q., January 16 and 17, 1956. [13a-c000034-d0002-004] <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jeanne Rioux, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Van-couver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: 2011-3207. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mary Chapman, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 4 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-1529. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vitaline Elsie Jenner, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-131. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Coates, <em>A Global History of Indigenous Peoples</em>, 244–245. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples</em>; Coates, <em>A Global</em> <em>History of Indigenous Peoples</em>, 244–245. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Smith, <em>Apology to First Nations People,</em> <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/beliefs/policies/1986/a651">http://www.united-church.ca/beliefs/policies/1986/a651</a> (accessed 23 October 2014). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Missionary Oblates of Mary Immaculate, <em>An Apology to the First Nations of Canada by the Oblate Conference of Canada</em>, <a href="http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/oblate_apology_english.pdf">http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/oblate_apology_english.pdf</a> (accessed 27 October 2014) <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the Anglican apology, see: Hiltz, <em>A Step Along the Path: Apology by Archbishop Fred Hiltz</em>, <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/files/2011/06/Apology-English.pdf">http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/files/2011/06/Apology-English.pdf</a> (accessed 27 October 2014). For the Presbyterian apology, see: Presbyterian Church in Canada, <em>The Confession of the Presbyterian Church in Canada as Adopted by the General Assembly,</em> <a href="http://presbyterian.ca/?wpd-mdl=92&amp;">http://presbyterian.ca/?wpd-mdl=92&amp;</a> (accessed 27 October 2014); The United Church of Canada, <em>Apology to Former Students of United Church Indian Residential Schools, and to Their Families and Communities</em>, <a href="http://www">http://www</a>. united-church.ca/beliefs/policies/1998/a623 (accessed 27 October 2014). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Bernard’s Lawsuit Helped Natives Nationwide<em>,” The Daily News</em>, <a href="http://www.canada.com/story_print.html?id=983a8b88-a8ac-4e09-9e5c-b2c0e207ac3d">http://www.canada.com/story_print.html?id=983a8b88-a8ac-4e09-9e5c-b2c0e207ac3d</a>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, <em>The Journal</em>, Barbara Frum interview with Phil Fontaine, 30 October 1990, <a href="http://archives.cbc.ca/society/education/clips//11177">http://archives.cbc.ca/society/education/clips//11177</a>. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lleweyn, “Dealing with the Legacy,” 253 at 261. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Assembly of First Nations, <em>Assembly of First Nations Report,</em> 11. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Cloud v. Canada (Attorney General)</em> 2004 CanLII 45444 (ON CA). <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6850. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6851. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6852. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6853. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6855. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6855. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6855. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6856. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (11 June 2008), 6856. <a href="thehistory.xhtml#noteref-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
