<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes - The Legacy</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes_thelegacy" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h3>The legacy</h3>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Johanne Coutu-Autut, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Rankin Inlet, Nunavut, 21 March 2011, Statement Number: 2011- 0160. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Joseph Martin Larocque, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 21 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-4386. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mervin Mirasty, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 21 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-4391. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Genine Paul-Dimitracopoulos, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 27 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2862. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Alma Scott, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-016. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, <em>Interim Report</em>, Recommendation 15, 29. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, <em>Canada’s Statement of Support</em>, <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374239861/1309374546142">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374239861/1309374546142</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 6-21-1, volume 2 (Ctrl #27-6), H. M. Jones to Deputy Minister, 13 December 1956. [NCA-001989-0001] <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a discussion that places both child welfare and residential schools in the context of the ongoing colonization of Aboriginal people, see: McKenzie and Hudson, “Native Children.” <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, as cited in Sinha and Kozlowski, “Structure of Aboriginal Child Welfare,” 4. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Aboriginal People in Canada,</em> 19. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Norma Kassi, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 29 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE203. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, Convention on the Rights of the Child, <em>Concluding observations,</em> 12–13. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, Convention on the Rights of the Child, <em>Concluding observations,</em> 7. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vandna et al., <em>Kiskisik Awasisak,</em> x–xi. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vandna et al., <em>Kiskisik Awasisak</em>, xi. The authors concluded that there was not enough data on Métis and Inuit children, and excluded them from the study. Vandna et al., <em>Kiskisik Awasisak,</em> ix. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vandna et al., <em>Kiskisik Awasisak</em>, 83–87. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vandna et al., <em>Kiskisik Awasisak,</em> xviii. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vandna et al., <em>Kiskisik Awasisak</em>, xii. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ruiz-Casares et al., “Supervisory Neglect,” 478. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, [Name redacted], Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 19 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-19JU10-048. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Linda Clarke, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, St. Albert, Alberta, 12 June 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0013. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Information about ethnicity was available for 94 of the 145 children who have died in foster care since 1999. Of that number, 74 were Aboriginal. “Deaths of Alberta Aboriginal Children in Care No ‘Fluke of Statistics,’” <em>Edmonton Journal,</em> 8 January 2014, <a href="http://www.edmontonjournal.com/life/Deaths+Alberta+aboriginal+children+care+fluke+statistics/9212384/story.html">http://www.edmontonjournal.com/life/Deaths+Alberta+aboriginal+children+care+fluke+statistics/9212384/story.html</a> (accessed 18 February 2014). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sinha and Kozlowski, “Structure of Aboriginal Child Welfare,” 3; “Deaths of Alberta Aboriginal Children in Care No ‘Fluke of Statistics,’” <em>Edmonton Journal,</em> 8 January 2014, <a href="http://www.edmontonjournal.com/life/Deaths+Alberta+aboriginal+children+care+fluke+statistics/9212384/story.html">http://www.edmontonjournal.com/life/Deaths+Alberta+aboriginal+children+care+fluke+statistics/9212384/story.html</a> (accessed 18 February 2014). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sinha and Kozlowski, “Structure of Aboriginal Child Welfare,” 4. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, Program Expenditures/Statistics, First Nations Child and Family Services Program Statistics, First Nations children ordinarily resident on reserve in care, <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1382549135936/1382549233428">https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1382549135936/1382549233428</a> (accessed 1 May 2015). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health, <em>Child and Youth Health,</em> 3. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wien et al., “Keeping First Nations Children at Home,” 13. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Blackstock et al., <em>Wen: de: We Are Coming</em>, 38. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Blackstock et al., <em>Wen: de: We Are Coming,</em> 89–90. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cradock, “Extraordinary Costs,” 179. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, “Jordan’s Principle,” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1334329827982/1334329861879">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1334329827982/1334329861879</a> (accessed 3 January 2014). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Pictou Landing Band Council v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 FC 342 (CanLII), para. 82. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Pictou Landing Band Council v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 FC 342 (CanLII), para. 82. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fletcher, “Origins of the Indian Child Welfare Act,” 1, 4. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Atwood, “Voice of the Indian Child,” 128. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Doris Young, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3517. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1942</em>, 154; Canada, <em>Annual Report of</em> <em>the Department of Indian Affairs, 1943,</em> 168; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1944,</em> 177; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1945,</em> 190; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1946</em>, 231; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1947</em>, 236; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1948</em>, 234; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1949,</em> 215; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1950</em>, 86–87; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1951,</em> 34–35; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1952</em>, 74–75; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1953</em>, 82–83; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1954,</em> 88–89; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1955,</em> 78–79; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1956,</em> 76–77; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1956–57</em>, 88–89; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1958</em>, 91; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1959</em>, 94; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1960,</em> 94; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1961,</em> 102; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1962</em>, 73; Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1963</em>, 62. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples</em>, Article 14:1, <a href="http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf">http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bougie and Senecal, “Registered Indian Children’s School Success,” 21. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bougie and Senecal, “Registered Indian Children’s School Success,” 21. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Educational Portrait of Canada, Census Year 2006</em>, 6, 19. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada Fact Sheet, <em>2011 National Household Survey Aboriginal Demographics</em>, <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1376329205785/1376329233875">https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1376329205785/1376329233875</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>National Committee on Inuit Education, <em>First Canadians, Canadians First,</em> <a href="https://www.itk.ca/sites/default/files/National-Strategy-on-Inuit-Education-2011_0.pdf">https://www.itk.ca/sites/default/files/National-Strategy-on-Inuit-Education-2011_0.pdf</a>, 7; Penny, “Formal Educational Attainment,” 33; Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Educational attainment of Aboriginal peoples,</em> <a href="http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-012-x/99-012-x2011003_3-eng.pdf">http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-012-x/99-012-x2011003_3-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richards et al., <em>Understanding the Aboriginal/Non-Aboriginal Gap,</em> 1; Wilk et al., “Métis Educational Attainment,” 51–52. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Human Rights Commission, “Report on Equality Rights,” 3, 12, 32. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Aboriginal People Living Off-reserve</em>, 15. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, “Census Inuit Table: 89-636-x,” <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-636-x/89-636-x2008001-eng.htm">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-636-x/89-636-x2008001-eng.htm</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joe Friesen, “Ottawa Failing to Include First Nations in Key Employment Data,” <em>Globe and Mail,</em> 23 January 2015, <a href="http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/unemployment-stats-missing-in-areas-where-job-training-is-a-priority/article22598523">http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/unemployment-stats-missing-in-areas-where-job-training-is-a-priority/article22598523</a> (accessed 1 May 2015). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wilson and Macdonald, <em>Income Gap</em>, 8. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wilson and Macdonald, <em>Income Gap</em>, 4. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Macdonald and Wilson, <em>Poverty or Prosperity,</em> 6. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wilson and Macdonald, <em>Income Gap</em>, 14. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Human Rights Commission, <em>Report on Equality Rights of Aboriginal People,</em> 17. The poverty line is measured by the 2009 SLID Low-Income Measure (LIM). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Human Rights Commission, <em>Report on Equality Rights of Aboriginal People</em>, 18–19. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Reforming First Nations Education,</em> 9. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Department of Indian and Northern Affairs, “Indian Education Paper: Phase 1,” 1982, as cited in Paquette and Fallon, <em>First Nations Education Policy,</em> 80. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Reforming First Nations Education,</em> 56. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>McCue, <em>First Nations 2nd and 3rd Level Education Services,</em> 52, <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education/9._2006_april_harvey_mccue_first_nations_2nd_&amp;_3rd_level_services_paper.pdf">http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education/9._2006_april_harvey_mccue_first_nations_2nd_&amp;_3rd_level_services_paper.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Reforming First Nations Education</em>, 11; First Nations Education Council, <em>Funding Formula for First Nation Schools</em>, <a href="http://www.cepn-fnec.com/PDF/etudes_documents/fiche_complete_eng.pdf">http://www.cepn-fnec.com/PDF/etudes_documents/fiche_complete_eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Reforming First Nations Education,</em> 11, 31. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>First Nations Education Council, <em>Funding Formula for First Nation Schools,</em> 1, <a href="http://www.cepn-fnec.com/PDF/etudes_documents/fiche_complete_eng.pdf">http://www.cepn-fnec.com/PDF/etudes_documents/fiche_complete_eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Reforming First Nations Education,</em> 35. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Reforming First Nations Education;</em> Assembly of First Nations, National Panel on First Nation Elementary and Secondary Education for Students on Reserve, <em>Nurturing the Learning Spirit,</em> <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education2/national-panel.pdf">http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education2/national-panel.pdf</a>; First Nations Education Council et al., <em>Report on Priority Actions,</em> <a href="http://www.cepnfnec.com/PDF/accueil/Report%20on%20Priority%20Actions%20in%20View%20of%20Improving%20First%20Nations%20Education%20-%20November%202011_eng_website%20version_.pdf">http://www.cepnfnec.com/PDF/accueil/Report%20on%20Priority%20Actions%20in%20View%20of%20Improving%20First%20Nations%20Education%20-%20November%202011_eng_website%20version_.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Albert Marshall, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-17JU10-050. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Assembly of First Nations, National Panel on First Nation Elementary and Secondary Education for Students on Reserve, <em>Nurturing the Learning Spirit,</em> 14<em>,</em> <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education2/national-panel.pdf">http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/education2/national-panel.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hodgson-Smith, <em>State of Métis Nation Learning,</em> 4, 26, <a href="http://www.ccl-cca.ca/pdfs/AbLKC/StateOfMetisNationLearning.pdf">http://www.ccl-cca.ca/pdfs/AbLKC/StateOfMetisNationLearning.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hodgson-Smith, <em>State of Métis Nation Learning,</em> 4, 17, 82, <a href="http://www.ccl-cca.ca/pdfs/AbLKC/StateOfMetisNationLearning.pdf">http://www.ccl-cca.ca/pdfs/AbLKC/StateOfMetisNationLearning.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>National Committee on Inuit Education, <em>First Canadians, Canadians First</em>, 7–9, 76–79. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>National Committee on Inuit Education, <em>First Canadians, Canadians First,</em> 80. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>The Educational Attainment of Aboriginal People,</em> Table 2, <a href="https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-012-x/99-012-x2011003_3-eng.cfm">https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-012-x/99-012-x2011003_3-eng.cfm</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Auditor General of Canada, <em>Status Report,</em> 13, <a href="http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_oag_201106_04_e.pdf">http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_oag_201106_04_e.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Geraldine Bob, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Simpson, Northwest Territories, 23 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2685. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Assembly of First Nations, “Financial Support for First Nation Students in College and University: The Cost of Implementing the Recommendations of the Standing Committee of the House of Commons on Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development,” as cited in First Nations Education Council, <em>Paper on First Nations Education Funding</em>, 35. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Assembly of First Nations, Chiefs Assembly on Education, <em>Early Childhood Education,</em> http:// <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/events/fact_sheet-ccoe-5.pdf">www.afn.ca/uploads/files/events/fact_sheet-ccoe-5.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Assembly of First Nations, <em>Breaking the Silence</em>, 25–26. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Gathering Strength</em>, 3:612–613. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Michael Sillett, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 27 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2870. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, file 81/25-1 (Ctrl#240-13), R. Morris to Chiefs, Petahbun [Pehtabun] Area, 9 February 1979, 2–3. [NCA-001721] <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Conrad Burns, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 17 January 2012, Statement Number: SP036. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>International Covenant,</em> Article 27. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples</em>, articles 8, 13, 14, and 16. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Agnes Mills, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 29 June 2011, Statement Number: SC090. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mary Courchene, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Pine Creek First Nation, Manitoba, 28 November 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2515. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Aboriginal Peoples and Language,</em> <a href="http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011003_1-eng.cfm">http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011003_1-eng.cfm</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Aboriginal Peoples and Language</em>, <a href="http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011003_1-eng.cfm">http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011003_1-eng.cfm</a>; Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Population reporting an Aboriginal identity,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/demo38a-eng.htm">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/demo38a-eng.htm</a>; Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Aboriginal Languages in Canada</em>. <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-008-x/2007001/9628-eng.htm">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-008-x/2007001/9628-eng.htm</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moseley and Nicolas, <em>Atlas of the World’s Languages,</em> 117. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>R. v. Van der Peet</em>, 1996 CanLII 216 (SCC). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Assembly of First Nations, <em>Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples at 10 Years</em>, 18. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (2 November 2006), 1010. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Michael Sillett, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 27 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2870. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Email from Glenn Morrisson, Policy Manager of the Aboriginal Affairs Directorate in the Citizenship Participation Branch, to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (July 9, 2012). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Department of Canadian Heritage, <em>2012–2013 Report on Plans and Priorities,</em> 26. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, <em>Language Rights in Canada’s North,</em> 19–20. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Sabrina Williams, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3982. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>French, <em>My Name Is Masak</em>, 19. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gresko, “Everyday Life at Qu’Appelle Industrial School,” 80. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ruby Firth, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 22 July 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0326. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Sonia Wuttunee-Byrd, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: SC093. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Katherine Copenace, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-129. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,</em> articles 7, 21, 22, 24. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,</em> Article 23. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,</em> articles 24, 31. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health, <em>Looking for Aboriginal Health</em>, 43–50. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Report of an Interdepartmental Working Group to the Committee of Deputy Ministers on Justice and Legal Affairs, Fiduciary Relationship of the Crown with Aboriginal Peoples: Implementation and Management Issues – A Guide for Managers (Ottawa, 1995), 13, as cited in Boyer, <em>No. 1 Aboriginal Health,</em> 5, 20–21. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boyer, <em>No. 1 Aboriginal Health,</em> 19–21, 23. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boyer, <em>No. 1 Aboriginal Health,</em> 19. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Smylie, “Review of Aboriginal Infant Mortality Rates, 147. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Mortality rates among children and teenagers,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-003-x/2012003/article/11695-eng.htm">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-003-x/2012003/article/11695-eng.htm</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Select health indicators of First Nations people,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130129/dq130129b-eng.htm">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130129/dq130129b-eng.htm</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>First Nations Centre, <em>First Nations Regional Longitudinal Health Survey,</em> 114. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kirmayer et al., <em>Suicide Among Aboriginal People</em>, xv, 22. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Australia, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, <em>Closing the Gap,</em> <a href="http://www.dpmc.gov.au/pmc-indigenous-affairs/publication/closing-gap-prime-ministers-report-2015">http://www.dpmc.gov.au/pmc-indigenous-affairs/publication/closing-gap-prime-ministers-report-2015</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Medical Association, “Aboriginal Health Programming under Siege,” E740. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Trudy King, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Fort Resolution, Northwest Territories, 28 April 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0381. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, M. R. E. Linklater, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-055. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Chansonneuve, <em>Addictive Behaviours,</em> 42–46. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, ASAGR, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, M. W. Pacholuk, Final Report of the Native Indian Residential School Task Force, Project E-NIRS, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, no date, 20, 21, 28, 45. [RCMP-564517] <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, ASGAR, Stephen N. S. Thatcher, Affidavit in Supreme Court of BC, no date, 25–35. [RCMP-564327] <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, ASAGR, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, M. W. Pacholuk, Final Report of the Native Indian Residential School Task Force, Project E-NIRS, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, no date, 27, 32, 45. [RCMP-564517] <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, ASAGR, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, M. W. Pacholuk, Final Report of the Native Indian Residential School Task Force, Project E-NIRS, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, no date, 40. [RCMP-564517] <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Criminal Code, 1985,</em> chapter C-46, section 274. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Indian Residential Schools Adjudication Secretariat, Adjudication Secretariat Statistics, from September 19, 2007, January 31, 2015, <a href="http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php">http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php</a> (accessed 20 February 2015). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, ASAGR, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, M. W. Pacholuk, Final Report of the Native Indian Residential School Task Force, Project E-NIRS, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, no date, 45. [RCMP-564517] <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Law Commission of Canada, <em>Restoring Dignity</em>, 151, 178. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement, <a href="http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/IRS%20Settlement%20Agreement-%20ENGLISH.pdf">http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/IRS%20Settlement%20Agreement-%20ENGLISH.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bernard Catcheway, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Skownan First Nation, Manitoba, 12 October 2011, Statement Number: 2011-2510. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Amelia Galligos-Thomas, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 14 April 2012, Statement Number: 2011-3975. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Adult Correctional Services in Canada 1995–1996,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x1997004-eng.pdf">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x1997004-eng.pdf</a>; Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Adult Correctional Services in Canada 2011–2012,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Adult Correctional Services in Canada, 2011–2012,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Adult Correctional Services in Canada, 2011–2012,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11918-eng.htm#a5</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, [Name redacted], Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Long Plain First Nation, Manitoba, 27 July 2010, Statement Number: 01-MB-26JY10-011. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Daniel Andre, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Whitehorse, Yukon, 23 May 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0202. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Grace Campbell, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-136. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Criminal Code,</em> 1985, chapter C-46, section 718.2(e). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>R. v. Gladue</em>, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), para. 58–65. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>R. v. Gladue</em>, 1999 CanLII 679 (SCC), para. 64. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a description of the process of preparing Gladue reports, see: Istvanffy, <em>Gladue Primer</em>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>R. v. Ipeelee</em>, 2012 SCC 13 (CanLII), para. 81, 84. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Safe Streets and Communities Act</em>, 2012, chapter 1. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There have been some recent cases in which courts have made decisions counter to the mandatory minimum provisions. See, for example: <em>R. v. Smickle</em>, 2012, ONSC 602 (CanLII). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Public Safety Canada, <em>Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder,</em> 5, <a href="http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/ftl-lchl-spctrm/ftl-lchl-spctrm-eng.pdf">http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/ftl-lchl-spctrm/ftl-lchl-spctrm-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tait, *Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tait, <em>Fetal Alcohol Syndrome</em>, xviii. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ospina and Dennett, <em>Systematic Review,</em> iii. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Correctional Service of Canada, <em>Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder(FASD)</em>, iv, <a href="http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/lbrr/archives/cn21451-eng.pdf">http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/lbrr/archives/cn21451-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>R. v. Harris</em>, 2002 BCCA 152 (CanLII), para. 18–20. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mitten, “Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders,” <a href="http://www.justicereformcomm.sk.ca/volume2/12section9.pdf">http://www.justicereformcomm.sk.ca/volume2/12section9.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a study that involved interviews with inmates in a minimum security institution designed specifically for Aboriginal inmates, see: Braun, <em>Colonization, Destruction, and Renewal</em>. See also: Waldram, <em>The Way of the Pipe</em>, 129–150; Crutcher and Trevethan, <em>Examination of Healing Lodges,</em> 52. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nielson, “Canadian Aboriginal Healing Lodges.” <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>British Columbia, Ministry of Justice, Corrections Branch, Aboriginal Programs and Relationships, <em>Inclusivity</em>, <a href="http://www.pssg.gov.bc.ca/corrections/docs/AboriginalStratPlan.pdf">http://www.pssg.gov.bc.ca/corrections/docs/AboriginalStratPlan.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Chris Gargan, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, 30 October 2012, Statement Number: 2011-0430. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Corrections and Conditional Release Act</em>, SC 1992, chapter 20, <a href="http://canlii.ca/t/52db0">http://canlii.ca/t/52db0</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bonta et al., “Risk Prediction,” 127. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Youth Correctional Services in Canada 2011–2012,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11917-eng.htm#a5">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2014001/article/11917-eng.htm#a5</a>; Canada, Department of Justice, Youth Justice Research, “A One-Day Snapshot,” 3. These figures do not include Saskatchewan, which has a high rate of Aboriginal youth incarceration <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Youth Criminal Justice Act</em>, SC 2002, chapter 1, section 38(1). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, “Youth Court Statistics 2011/2012,” <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130613/dq130613d-eng.pdf">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130613/dq130613d-eng.pdf</a>; Canada, Statistics Canada<em>, Youth Correctional Statistics in Canada, 2010/2011</em>; Canadian Bar Association, <em>Submission on Bill C-10,</em> 8, <a href="http://www.cba.org/cba/submissions/PDF/11-45-eng.pdf">http://www.cba.org/cba/submissions/PDF/11-45-eng.pdf</a>. Not all provinces and territories have seen a decrease in youth in correctional services. In fact, since 2005–06, rates have increased in Manitoba, Yukon, and Alberta. Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Youth Correctional Statistics in Canada, 2010/2011,</em> 5. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Youth Correctional Statistics in Canada, 2010/2011</em>, 7. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>British Columbia, Office of the Provincial Health Officer, “Health, Crime and Doing Time,” <a href="http://www.health.gov.bc.ca/pho/pdf/health-crime-2013.pdf">http://www.health.gov.bc.ca/pho/pdf/health-crime-2013.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Indian Residential Schools Adjudication Secretariat, Adjudication Secretariat Statistics, from September 19, 2007, January 31, 2015, <a href="http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php">http://iap-pei.ca/information/stats-eng.php</a> (accessed 20 February 2015). <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ruby Firth, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 22 July 2011, Statement Number: 2011-0326. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Violent Victimization of Aboriginal People,</em> <a href="http://wgc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11415-eng.pdf">http://wgc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11415-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Violent Victimization of Aboriginal Women,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11439-eng.pdf">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11439-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Violent Victimization of Aboriginal People,</em> 15, <a href="http://wgc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11415-eng.pdf">http://wgc.ca/pub/85-002-x/2011001/article/11415-eng.pdf</a>; Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Measuring Violence Against Women,</em> 67; Native Women’s Association of Canada, <em>Voices of Our Sisters in Spirit,</em> 6, <a href="http://www">http://www</a>. nwac.ca/sites/default/files/download/admin/NWAC_VoicesofOurSistersInSpiritII_March2009FINAL.pdf. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Victimization and Offending,</em> <a href="http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x2006003-eng.pdf">http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/85-002-x/85-002-x2006003-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Statistics Canada, <em>Measuring Violence Against Women,</em> 9, 19; Native Women’s Association of Canada, <em>Voices of Our Sisters in Spirit,</em> 94–95, <a href="http://www.nwac.ca/sites/default/files/download/admin/NWAC_VoicesofOurSistersInSpiritII_March2009FINAL.pdf">http://www.nwac.ca/sites/default/files/download/admin/NWAC_VoicesofOurSistersInSpiritII_March2009FINAL.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Velma Jackson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, St. Paul, Alberta, 6 January 2011, Statement Number: 01-AB-06JA11-003. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Royal Canadian Mounted Police, <em>Missing and Murdered Aboriginal Women,</em> 3, <a href="http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/pubs/mmaw-faapd-eng.pdf">http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/pubs/mmaw-faapd-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thelegacy.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
