<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes - Appendix 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes_appendix3" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h3 >Appendix 3: Persons Found Guilty of Abusing Residential School Students</h3>
<ol>
<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, Alberta Justice, Clerk of the Provincial Court of Alberta, Conviction, 28 September 1960. [EDM-003354] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, ASAGR, R. G. Pooley to R. F. Davey, 23 November 1963; [AANDC-261608] TRC, ASAGR, M. Brodhead to Regional School Superintendent – Alberta, 3 January 1964; [AANDC-261599] “Jail Teacher for One Year,” <em>Winnipeg Free Press</em>, 26 September 1963. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, 978/2, volume 1209, 05/1965–06/1971, NAC, V. A. Stephens to H. B. Robinson, 29 May 1970. [ABR-094456] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote"><p>Eva Salinas, “Four-year Hunt Ends in Arrest,” <em>Globe and Mail</em>, 3 August 2006. <a href='http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/four-year-hunt-ends-in-arrest/article713735/'>http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/four-year-hunt-ends-in-arrest/article713735/</a>. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote"><p>Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada,</em> 2. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote"><p>Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 2. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote"><p>LeBeuf, <em>Role of the RCMP</em>, 462. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote"><p><em>R. vs. Maczynski</em>, 1997 CanLII 2491 (BCCA) (appeal of sentence); TRC, NRA, No document location, no document file source, E. Morriset to R. B. Kohls, 28 October 1974. [OBG-002922] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote"><p>“Former Students File Suit Over Sexual, Physical Abuse,” Saskatoon <em>Star-Phoenix,</em> 26 November 1996; Caroline Murray, “Abuse Victims Recall Atrocities,” <em>Whitehorse Daily Star. 25 November 1996;</em> Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 2. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote"><p>Richard Gleeson, “Four Years for Sex Assault,” <em>Northern News Services,</em> 8 August 1997, http:// <a href='http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-08/aug8_97jail.html'>www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-08/aug8_97jail.html</a>; Shea, <em>Institutional</em> <em>Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 9. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote"><p>It should be noted that of the eight counts of buggery, five related to offences committed at Lytton and the other three to offences committed at another institution that was not a residential school, the Central City Mission. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote"><p>LeBeuf, <em>Role of the RCMP</em>, 462; “School Sex Assaults Bring Jail,” <em>Vancouver Sun,</em> 4 October 1996; Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 2. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote"><p>LeBeuf, <em>Role of the RCMP</em>, 462; “School Sex Assaults Bring Jail,” <em>Vancouver Sun,</em> 4 October 1996. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote"><p>Canadian Press, “Former Employee of Residential School Jailed for Sex Abuses,” Victoria <em>Times-Colonist,</em> January 24, 2004; United Church of Canada Archives, Residential School Archive Project, “The Children Remembered, Alberni Residential School,” <a href='http://thechildrenremembered.ca/schools-history/alberni/'>http://thechildrenremembered.ca/schools-history/alberni/</a> (accessed 6 November 2013). <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote"><p><em>R. v. Plint,</em> [1995] B.C.J. No. 3060 (BCSC); Canadian Press, “Former Employee of Residential School Jailed for Sex Abuses,” Victoria <em>Times-Colonist</em>, January 24, 2004. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote"><p><em>R. v. Plint,</em> [1995] B.C.J. No. 3060 (BCSC); Canadian Press, “Former Employee of Residential School Jailed for Sex Abuses,” Victoria <em>Times-Colonist</em>, January 24, 2004. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Her Majesty the Queen and Harold Daniel McIntee, Reasons for Judgment, Judge C. C. Marnett, Provincial Court of British Columbia, 1 June 1989; [BKM-000204] Ann Rees, “Priest’s Victims Admit Sexual Abuse,” <em>The Province</em> (Vancouver)<em>,</em> 19 July 1989; Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada,</em> 2–3. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote"><p><em>R. v. Constant</em> (28 September 2005), Court of Queen’s Bench (Dauphin Centre), Indictment (5 May 2003), and Disposition (26 September 2005), #03-05-00069, documents obtained from Court of Queen’s Bench (Dauphin Centre), Dauphin, Manitoba, 28 January 2014. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, file 630-118/10-1,2,3, part 1A, Fort McPherson Reports, General and Supplies, 1963–1967, Archival box 239-1, Archival Acc. G-1979-003, O. G. Tucker to H. Darkes, 26 March 1963. [FHU-001914] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada – Ottawa, RG22, Perm. volume 1074, file 250-26-17, part 2, Fort McPherson – School, 1959, FA 22-3, David Searle to D. M. Christie, 23 April 1964. [FHU001380-0001] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote"><p><em>R. v. Comeau,</em> [1998] N.W.T.J. No. 34 (NTSC); Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 9. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote"><p>Ed Struzik, “Priest’s Sordid Past Shocks Parish: Father Houston Was Declared Dangerous Sex Offender, Sent to Prison in 1962,” <em>Edmonton Journal</em>, 6 June 2002. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote"><p>Andrew Raven, “Grollier Hall Supervisor Sentenced,” <em>Northern News Services,</em> 20 August 2004, <a href='http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2004-08/aug20_04crt.html'>http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2004-08/aug20_04crt.html</a>. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote"><p>Justice J. Vertes, “In the Supreme Court of the Northwest Territories, Between Her Majesty the Queen and Paul Leroux,” 10 August 1998; Glenn Taylor, “Arrest in Grollier Hall Sex Case: Former Boys Supervisor Faces 32 Counts of Sexual Assault on His Student,” <em>Northern News Services</em>, 16 June 1997, <a href='http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-06/jun16_97sex.html'>http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/1997-06/jun16_97sex.html</a>. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote"><p>Dawn Ostrem, “Back to Court: Paul Leroux Challenges Convictions, Sentence,” <em>Northern News Services,</em> 26 June 1997, <a href='http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2000-06/jun26_00back.html'>http://www.nnsl.com/frames/newspapers/2000-06/jun26_00back.html</a>. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote"><p>“Ex-residential School Worker Convicted of Abusing Boys,” <em>CBC News,</em> 5 November 2013, <a href='http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/ex-residential-school-worker-convicted-of-abusing-boys-1.2415810'>http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatchewan/ex-residential-school-worker-convicted-of-abusing-boys-1.2415810</a>; “Paul Leroux Gets 3 Years for Residential School Abuse, <em>CBC News,</em> 12 December 2013, <a href='http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatoon/paul-leroux-gets-3-years-for-residential-school-abuse-1.2461629'>http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatoon/paul-leroux-gets-3-years-for-residential-school-abuse-1.2461629</a>. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote"><p>“Nun Guilty in Residential School Assaults,” <em>CBC News,</em> 28 December 1998, <a href='http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nun-guilty-in-residential-school-assaults-1.166827'>http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nun-guilty-in-residential-school-assaults-1.166827</a>. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote"><p>Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 10. Shea observes only that the sentence did not include jail time. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote"><p>Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 12. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote"><p>Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>, 14–15. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote"><p>“Nun Forced Native Students to Eat Their Own Vomit,” <em>Edmonton Journal,</em> 25 June 1999. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote"><p><em>R. v. Hands,</em> [1996] O.J. No. 264; LeBeuf, <em>Role of the RCMP</em>, 456; Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in</em> <em>Canada</em>, 11. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8754, file 654/25-1, volume 1, Henry G. Cook to R. F. Davey, 2 December 1955. [IRC-047015] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote"><p>LeBeuf, <em>Role of the RCMP</em>, 457. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote"><p>Ewald Holfeld’s last name appears in some records as Schofield and in others as Holdfeld. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6309, file 645-1, part 3, R. S. Davis, extract from Quarterly Report Ending March, 1945, on Touchwood Agency. [IRC-047128] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6309, file 645-1, part 3, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Constable A. Zimmerman, 28 July 1945. [GDC-010369-0001] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6309, file 645-1, part 3, R. S. Davis to Indian Affairs, 13 February 1947. [GDC-010362-0001] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote"><p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 8754, file 654-1/25-1, volume 1, Henry G. Cook to R. F. Davey, 2 December 1955. [IRC-047015] <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote"><p>Mandryk, “Uneasy Neighbours,” 210. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote"><p>LeBeuf, <em>Role of the RCMP</em>, 458. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote"><p>“Man sentenced to five years for sexually assaulting Native girls,” Windspeaker Staff, Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, Windspeaker, Canada’s National Aboriginal News Source, Volume 12 Issue 20, 1995, <a href='http://www.ammsa.com/publications/windspeaker/man-sentenced-five-years-sexually-assaulting-native-girls'>http://www.ammsa.com/publications/windspeaker/man-sentenced-five-years-sexually-assaulting-native-girls</a>, accessed 8 November 2013. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>
<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote"><p><em>R. v. Frappier</em>, [1990] Y.J. No.163 (Terr. Ct.) (QuickLaw); Shea, <em>Institutional Child Abuse in Canada</em>; <em>Criminal Cases</em>, 17. <a href="appendix3.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p></li>

</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
