<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-CA">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes - The Challenge of Reconciliation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes_challengeofreconciliation" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h3>The challenge of reconciliation</h3>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ian Campbell, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 25 June 2014, Statement Number: SE048. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Debates of the Senate, 40th Parliament, 2nd session (11 June 2009), volume 146, issue 45. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Lethal Legacy</em>, 165. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For various perspectives on the events at Oka, see, for example: Alfred, <em>Heeding the Voices</em>; Pertusati, <em>In Defense of Mohawk Land</em>; Miller, <em>Lethal Legacy</em>; Simpson and Ladner, <em>This is an Honour Song</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the place of media in shaping popular opinion on the role of warriors in conflicts with the state, see: Valaskakis, <em>Indian Country</em>. On warriors and warrior societies in contemporary Indigenous communities, see: Alfred and Lowe, “Warrior Societies,” <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letters from Prime Minister Brian Mulroney to Tony Penikett, Government Leader, Government of the Yukon Territory, 15 November 1990, and Dennis Patterson, Government Leader, Government of the Northwest Territories, 15 November 1990, PCO 2150-1, Ident. No. 34788, TRC Document Number TRC3379. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Report</em>, 1:675–697. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,</em> Article 43, <a href="http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf">http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anaya, “Right of Indigenous Peoples,” 196. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, “Canada’s Endorsement,” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374807748/1309374897928">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374807748/1309374897928</a> (accessed 15 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, “Canada’s Endorsement,” <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374807748/1309374897928">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374807748/1309374897928</a> (accessed 15 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations General Assembly, “Outcome Document,” A/RES/69/2, 25 September 2014, <a href="http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/69/2">http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/69/2</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations, “Canada’s Statement on the World Conference,” <a href="http://www.canadainternational.gc.ca/prmny-mponu/canada_un-canada_onu/statements-declarations/other-autres/2014-09-22_WCIPD-PADD.aspx?lang=eng">http://www.canadainternational.gc.ca/prmny-mponu/canada_un-canada_onu/statements-declarations/other-autres/2014-09-22_WCIPD-PADD.aspx?lang=eng</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Amnesty International Canada et al., “Canada Uses World Conference,” <a href="http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/Joint_Public_Statement_re_Canada_attack_on_UNDRIP_Sept_24_2014.pdf">http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/Joint_Public_Statement_re_Canada_attack_on_UNDRIP_Sept_24_2014.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John, “Survival, Dignity, Well-Being,” 58. Grand Chief John, an executive member of the First Nations Summit Task Group in British Columbia, participated in the development of the <em>Declaration</em>. He is a former co-chair of the North American Indigenous Peoples Caucus and will serve as a North American Representative to the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues until 2016. See: First Nations Summit, <a href="http://www.fns.bc.ca/about/e_john.htm">http://www.fns.bc.ca/about/e_john.htm</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia,</em> 2014 CanLII 44 (SCC), para. 73. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia,</em> 2014 CanLII 44 (SCC), para. 97. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Sol Sanderson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: SC108. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reid, “Roman Catholic Foundations,” 5. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See explains its role and function at the United Nations as follows: “The Holy See … is the central government of the Roman Catholic Church. As such, the Holy See is an institution, which under international law and in practice, has a legal personality that allows it to enter into treaties as the juridical equal of a State…. The Holy See maintains full diplomatic relations with one hundred seventy-seven (177) countries out of the one hundred ninety-three (193) member countries of the UN…. The Holy See enjoys <em>by its own choice</em> the status of Permanent Observer at the United Nations, rather than of a full Member. This is due primarily to the desire of the Holy See to obtain absolute neutrality in specific political problems.” See: UN Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See, “A Short History,” <a href="http://www.holyseemission.org/about/history-of-diplomacy-of-the-holy-see.aspx">http://www.holyseemission.org/about/history-of-diplomacy-of-the-holy-see.aspx</a> (accessed 19 February 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>UN Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See, Statement to Economic and Social Council, Discussion on the reports, “Impact on Indigenous Peoples,” <a href="http://www.ailanyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Holy-See.pdf">http://www.ailanyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/Holy-See.pdf</a> (accessed 20 January 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, in a study of how the doctrine was used to justify colonization, American legal scholar Robert A. Williams <abbr>Jr.</abbr> observed that the United States Supreme Court decision issued by Chief Justice John Marshall in 1823 in the case of <em>Johnson v. McIntosh</em> 21 U.S. 543 (1823), “represents the most influential legal opinion on indigenous peoples’ human rights ever issued by a court of law in the Western world. All the major English-language-speaking settler states adopted Marshall’s understanding of the Doctrine of Discovery and its principle that the first European discoverer of lands occupied by non-Christian tribal savages could claim a superior right to those lands under the European Law of Nations. Canada, Australia, and New Zealand all followed Marshall’s opinion as a precedent for their domestic law on indigenous peoples’ inferior rights to property and control over their ancestral lands.” See: Williams, <em>Savage Anxieties</em>, 224. See also: Williams, <em>American Indian</em>; Miller et al., <em>Discovering Indigenous Lands;</em> Newcomb, <em>Pagans in the Promised Land</em>, 2008. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Economic and Social Council, Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, “Study on the Impacts of the Doctrine,” <a href="http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf?OpenElement">http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf?OpenElement</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anglican Church of Canada, General Synod 2010, Resolution A086 R1, <a href="http://archive.anglican.ca/gs2010/resolutions/a086/">http://archive.anglican.ca/gs2010/resolutions/a086/</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sison, “Primate’s Commission.” See also: Anglican Church of Canada, “Message to the Church,” <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/primate/communications/commission-on-discovery-reconciliation-justice">http://www.anglican.ca/primate/communications/commission-on-discovery-reconciliation-justice</a>. See also: Anglican Church of Canada, “Learning to Call One Another Friends,” <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/primate/files/2014/06/PCDRJ_June2014_Update.pdf">http://www.anglican.ca/primate/files/2014/06/PCDRJ_June2014_Update.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>World Council of Churches<em>, What Is the World Council of Churches?,</em> <a href="http://www.oikoumene.org/en/about-us">http://www.oikoumene.org/en/about-us</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). Settlement Agreement signatories the Anglican Church of Canada, the Presbyterian Church in Canada, and the United Church of Canada are members of the WCC. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>World Council of Churches, <em>Statement on the doctrine of discovery,</em> <a href="http://www.oikoumene.org/en/resources/documents/executive-committee/bossey-february-2012/statement-on-the-doctrine-of-discovery-and-its-enduring-impact-on-indigenous-peoples">http://www.oikoumene.org/en/resources/documents/executive-committee/bossey-february-2012/statement-on-the-doctrine-of-discovery-and-its-enduring-impact-on-indigenous-peoples</a> (accessed 20 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Executive of the General Council of the United Church of Canada, <em>Meeting Summary, March 24–26, 2013,</em> <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/gce_1203_highlights.pdf">http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/gce_1203_highlights.pdf</a> (accessed 20 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, “Joint Statement,” <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/pfii_2012">http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/pfii_2012</a><em>–</em>doctrine_of_discovery<em>–</em>joint_statement_fe.pdf (accessed 20 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, “Study on the Impacts of the Doctrine,” para. 13, <a href="http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf?OpenElement">http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N14/241/84/PDF/N1424184.pdf?OpenElement</a> (accessed 14 March 2015). For the views of the court on the need for reconciliation, John cited <em>Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests),</em> 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII), para. 20. For the judicial notice on colonialism, John cited <em>R. v. Ipeelee,</em> 2012 SCC 13 (CanLII), para. 60. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Onondaga Nation, “Oren Lyons Presents,” <a href="http://www.onondaganation.org/news/2014/orenlyons-presents-at-u-n-51514/">http://www.onondaganation.org/news/2014/orenlyons-presents-at-u-n-51514/</a> (accessed 21 March 2015). Article 7, paragraph 2 of the <em>Declaration</em> affirms that “Indigenous peoples have the collective right to live in freedom, peace and security as distinct peoples and shall not be subjected to any act of genocide or any other act of violence, including forcibly removing children of the group to another group.” <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kelly, “Confessions of a Born Again Pagan,” 22–23. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: Treaty 7 Tribal Council et al., <em>True Spirit and Original Intent</em>; Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>; Ray, Miller, and Tough, <em>Bounty and Benevolence</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Treaty commissions in Ontario, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba have developed public education programs and materials designed to teach Canadians, particularly children and youth, about the Treaties. See, for example: Treaty Relations Commission of Manitoba, Public Education/Learning Centre, <a href="http://www.trcm.ca/public-education/learning-centre/">http://www.trcm.ca/public-education/learning-centre/</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Borrows, “Wampum at Niagara,” 160–161. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>, 72. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Capt. Thomas G. Anderson, “Report on the Affairs of the Indians of Canada, Section III,” Appendix No. 95 in Appt T of the <em>Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Canada,</em> vol. 6 (1818), cited in Borrows, “Wampum at Niagara,” 166. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Capt. Thomas G. Anderson, “Report on the Affairs of the Indians of Canada, Section III,” Appendix No. 95 in Appt T of the <em>Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Canada,</em> vol. 6 (1818), cited in Borrows, “Wampum at Niagara,” 167–168. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Governor General of Canada, his Excellency the Right Honourable David Johnston, Speech delivered at the Symposium in Honour of the 250th Anniversary of the Royal Proclamation of 1763, Gatineau, Que., October 7, 2013, <a href="http://www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=15345&amp;lan=eng">http://www.gg.ca/document.aspx?id=15345&amp;lan=eng</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>First Nations Summit, “Royal Proclamation Still Relevant,” <a href="http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/FNS_Op-ed_re_250th_anniver_of_Royal_Proclamation_10_07_13.pdf">http://www.fns.bc.ca/pdf/FNS_Op-ed_re_250th_anniver_of_Royal_Proclamation_10_07_13.pdf</a> (accessed 5 December 2014). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Steve Rennie, “Idle No More Protestors Mark 25th Anniversary of Royal Proclamation,” <em>Canadian Press</em>, October 7, 2013, <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/10/07/idle_no_more_protesters_mark_250th_anniversary_of_royal_proclamation.html">http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/10/07/idle_no_more_protesters_mark_250th_anniversary_of_royal_proclamation.html</a>. For more on the Idle No More movement, see: The Kino-nda-niimi Collective, <em>The Winter We Danced</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Legal scholar Robert A. Williams <abbr>Jr.</abbr> explains the Gus-Wen-Tah or Two-Row Wampum as “a sacred treaty belt … comprised of a bed of white wampum shell beads symbolizing the sacredness and purity of the treaty agreement between the two sides. Two parallel rows of purple wampum beads that extend down the length of the belt represent the separate paths travelled by the two sides on the same river. Each side travels in its own vessel: the Indians in a birch bark canoe, representing their laws, customs, and ways, and the whites in a ship, representing their laws, customs, and ways.” See: Williams <abbr>Jr.</abbr>, <em>Linking Arms Together</em>, 12–13. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Two-Row Wampum Centers Idle No More Toronto Rally, Not the Royal Proclamation,” October 9, 2013, <em>BasicNews.ca</em>, <a href="http://basicsnews.ca/two-row-wampum-centers-idle-no-more-toronto-rally-not-the-royal-proclamation/">http://basicsnews.ca/two-row-wampum-centers-idle-no-more-toronto-rally-not-the-royal-proclamation/</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations, <em>Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples,</em> Article 40, <a href="http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf">http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations General Assembly, Human Rights Council, UN Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, “Access to Justice,” 23, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/IPeoples/EMRIP/Session6/A-HRC-EMRIP-2013-2_en.pdf">http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/IPeoples/EMRIP/Session6/A-HRC-EMRIP-2013-2_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations General Assembly, Human Rights Council, UN Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, “Access to Justice,” 6, 8, 22–24, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/IPeoples/EMRIP/Session6/A-HRC-EMRIP-2013-2_en.pdf">http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/IPeoples/EMRIP/Session6/A-HRC-EMRIP-2013-2_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations General Assembly, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 13, 20. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: Borrows, <em>Canada’s Indigenous Constitution</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Highlights from the Report,</em> <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100014597/1100100014637">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100014597/1100100014637</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Stephen Augustine, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 26 June 2014, Statement Number: SE049. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Friedland, “IBA Accessing Justice and Reconciliation,” 18, quoting Chief White, Snuneymuxw First Nation, 16 November 2012, <a href="http://indigenousbar.ca/indigenouslaw/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/iba_ajr_final_report.pdf">http://indigenousbar.ca/indigenouslaw/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/iba_ajr_final_report.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). Funding for the AJR project was provided by the Ontario Law Foundation. The Academic Lead for the project was Professor Val Napoleon, Law Foundation Professor of Aboriginal Justice and Governance, University of Victoria, Faculty of Law. The project coordinator was Hadley Friedland, PhD candidate, Vanier Scholar, University of Alberta, Faculty of Law. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the importance of recognizing that victims of violence are also holders of rights, see: de Greiff, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 2012, 10, para. 29, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-46_en.pdf">http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-46_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Simpson, <em>Dancing on Our Turtle’s Back</em>, 22. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Honourable Steven Point, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 20 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE304. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanton, “Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission,” 4. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Castellano, Archibald, and DeGagné, “Introduction,” in Castellano, Archibald, and DeGagné, <em>From Truth to Reconciliation</em>, 2–3. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>de Greiff, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 2012, 10–12, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-46_en.pdf">http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-46_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wab Kinew, “It’s the Same Great Spirit,” <em>Winnipeg Free Press</em>, October 22, 2012. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Shawn A-in-chut Atleo, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2012, Statement Number: SNE202. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Report,</em> 1:38. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>R. v. Sparrow,</em> 1990 CanLII 104 (SCC). See also: <em>Guerin v. R.,</em> 1984 CanLII 25 (SCC); <em>Delgamuukw v. BC,</em> 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC); <em>Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests),</em> 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Manitoba Métis Federation Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 SCC 14 (CanLII), Appellants Factum, para. 94, citing Manitoba Court of Appeal ruling <em>Manitoba Métis Federations Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General) et al</em>., 2010 MBCA 71, paras. 533, 534. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Solicitor’s Opinions on Native American issues can be found at: <a href="http://www.doi.gov/solicitor/opinions.html">http://www.doi.gov/solicitor/opinions.html</a> (accessed 25 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the unfair burden of proof placed on Aboriginal peoples and the need to shift the onus onto the Crown, see, for example: Borrows, <em>Recovering Canada</em>, 101. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Report</em>, 1:8. The Commission adopts the definition of “civic trust” put forward by justice scholar Pablo de Greiff as it relates to the role of apologies in reconciliation processes: “Trust involves an expectation of … commitment to the norms and values we share … not the thick form of trust characteristic of relations between intimates, but rather ‘civic’ trust … that can develop among citizens who are strangers to one another, but who are members of the same political community…. Trusting an institution, then, amounts to knowing that its constitutive rules, values, and norms are shared by participants and that they regard them as binding…. Reconciliation, minimally, is the condition under which citizens can trust one another as citizens again (or anew)…. It presupposes that both institutions and persons can become <em>trustworthy</em>, and this is not something that is merely granted but <em>earned</em>.” See: de Greiff, “Role of Apologies,” 125–127. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Eugene Arcand, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2012, Statement Number: SNE202. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the role of official apologies in reparations and reconciliation, see, for example: Barkan and Karn, <em>Taking Wrongs Seriously</em>; de Greiff, “Role of Apologies”; James, “Wrestling with the Past”; Nobles, <em>Politics of Official Apologies</em>; Tavuchis, <em>Mea Culpa</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Debates of the Senate, 40th Parliament, 2nd session (11 June 2009), volume 146, issue 45. Other speakers included National President Mary Simon, Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami; Métis National Council President Clément Chartier; and Kevin Daniels, Interim National Chief, Congress of Aboriginal Peoples. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Theodore Fontaine, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 28 March 2014, Statement Number: SP203. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Noel Starblanket, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 16 January 2012, Statement Number: SP035. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vatican, Communiqué of the Holy See Press Office, April 29, 2009, <a href="http://www.vatican.va/resources/resources_canada-first-nations-apr2009_en.html">http://www.vatican.va/resources/resources_canada-first-nations-apr2009_en.html</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Pope Expresses ‘Sorrow’ for Abuse at Residential Schools,” <em>CBC News</em>, April 29, 2009, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/pope-expresses-sorrow-for-abuse-at-residential-schools-1.778019">http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/pope-expresses-sorrow-for-abuse-at-residential-schools-1.778019</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pastoral Letter of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI to the Catholics of Ireland, March 19, 2010, <a href="http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/letters/2010/documents/hf_ben-xvi_let_20100319_church-ireland_en.html">http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/letters/2010/documents/hf_ben-xvi_let_20100319_church-ireland_en.html</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pastoral Letter of His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI to the Catholics of Ireland, March 19, 2010, <a href="http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/letters/2010/documents/hf_ben-xvi_let_20100319_church-ireland_en.html">http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/letters/2010/documents/hf_ben-xvi_let_20100319_church-ireland_en.html</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Commissioner Wilton Littlechild, speaking at Oblates of St. Mary Immaculate gathering in St. Albert, Alberta, 2 May 2011, Statement Number: SC012. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Learning Places at National Events, there were information posters on the schools in the region, the Legacy of Hope Foundation exhibit, an information booth on the Missing Children Project, interactive maps, and a writing wall where people could offer their personal reflections. At each event in or near the Learning Place, the Settlement Agreement churches also organized a Churches Listening Area. The intent was to provide an opportunity for those Survivors who wished to do so to speak personally with a church representative about their residential school experience. When requested, church representatives also offered apologies to Survivors. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Alvin Dixon, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 30 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE302. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Anonymous, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-18JU10-055. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kelly, “Confession of a Born Again Pagan,” 20–21, 39. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jennie Blackbird, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Muncey, Ontario, 16 September 2011, Statement Number: 2011-4188. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The right of Indigenous peoples to observe traditional spiritual practices is upheld by the United Nations. Article 12:1 of the <em>United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples</em> says, “Indigenous peoples have the right to manifest, practice, develop and teach their spiritual and religious traditions, customs and ceremonies; the right to maintain, protect, and have access in privacy to their religious and cultural sites; the right to use and control of their ceremonial objects; and the right to the repatriation of their human remains.” See: United Nations, <em>Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples</em>, <a href="http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf">http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example, the case of a Christian Cree community that passed a resolution denying some of its community members the right to construct a sweat lodge and to teach youth about Cree spirituality: <a href="http://aptn.ca/news/2011/01/17/crees-ban-sweat-lodges-fns-spirituality-from-community/">http://aptn.ca/news/2011/01/17/crees-ban-sweat-lodges-fns-spirituality-from-community/</a>; <a href="http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2011/02/07/christian-crees-tear-down-sweat-lodge-15500">http://indiancountrytodaymedianetwork.com/2011/02/07/christian-crees-tear-down-sweat-lodge-15500</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jim Dumont, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 26 June 2014, Statement Number: SE049. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dumont and Hutchinson, “United Church Mission Goals,” 226–227. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mullin (Thundering Eagle Woman), “We Are One in the Spirit,” 28, <a href="http://presbyterian.ca/healing/">http://presbyterian.ca/healing/</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Presbyterian Church of Canada, 2013 General Assembly Referral, <em>Aboriginal Spirituality,</em> 2, 6, <a href="http://presbyterian.ca/gao/2013referrals/">http://presbyterian.ca/gao/2013referrals/</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anglican Church of Canada, “A New Agape,” <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/about/ccc/acip/a-new-agape/">http://www.anglican.ca/about/ccc/acip/a-new-agape/</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Church of Canada, “Living Faithfully,” 2, <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/economic/globalization/report.pdf">http://www.united-church.ca/files/economic/globalization/report.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Church of Canada, “Reviewing Partnership,” 26, <a href="http://www.gc41.ca/sites/default/files/pcpmm_empire.pdf">http://www.gc41.ca/sites/default/files/pcpmm_empire.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Church of Canada, The Executive of the General Council, March 24–26, 2012, Addendum H: Covenanting for Life, <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/addenda_2012-03-2426_executive.pdf">http://www.united-church.ca/files/general-council/gc40/addenda_2012-03-2426_executive.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Presbyterian Church in Canada, “Presbyterian Statement,” <a href="https://ecumenism.net/2015/01/presbyterian-statement-on-aboriginal-spiritual-practices.htm">https://ecumenism.net/2015/01/presbyterian-statement-on-aboriginal-spiritual-practices.htm</a> (accessed 17 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Church of Canada, “Affirming Other Spiritual Paths,” <a href="http://www.united-church.ca/files/aboriginal/schools/affirming-other-spiritual-paths.pdf">http://www.united-church.ca/files/aboriginal/schools/affirming-other-spiritual-paths.pdf</a> (accessed 17 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops, “Let Justice Flow,” 24–25, <a href="http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/let_justice_flow_like_a_mighty_river.pdf">http://www.cccb.ca/site/images/stories/pdf/let_justice_flow_like_a_mighty_river.pdf</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Catholic Aboriginal Council, Mandate, <a href="http://www.cccb.ca/site/eng/commissions-committees-and-aboriginal-council/aboriginal-council/canadian-catholic-aboriginal-council">http://www.cccb.ca/site/eng/commissions-committees-and-aboriginal-council/aboriginal-council/canadian-catholic-aboriginal-council</a> (accessed 22 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Dr. Alan L. Hayes, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 2 June 2012, Statement Number: SE020. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>MacKenzie, “For Everything There Is a Season,” 89. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Toronto Urban Native Ministry,” cited in Bush, “How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies,” 16. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Presbyterian Church in Canada, <em>Acts and Proceedings of the 137th General Assembly</em>, 368. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Healing Fund, Anglican Church, 2008, cited in Bush, “How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies,” 24–25. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Healing Fund, Anglican Church, 2008, cited in Bush, “How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies,” 24–25. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Healing Fund, Anglican Church, 2000, cited in Bush, “How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies,” 19. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bush, “How Have the Churches Lived out Their Apologies,” 18. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Aboriginal Healing Foundation (AHF) was mandated to provide funding and support for Aboriginal community-based healing projects. For more on the history of the AHF and the circumstances surrounding the closure, see: Spear, “Full Circle,” <a href="http://www.ahf.ca/downloads/full-circle-2.pdf">http://www.ahf.ca/downloads/full-circle-2.pdf</a> (accessed 28 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Allan Sutherland, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-067. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Esther Lachinette-Diabo, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 24 November 2010, Statement Number: 01-ON-24Nov10-020. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Charlotte Marten, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Lethbridge, Alberta, 9 October 2013, Statement Number: SP127. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Education scholar Penney Clark’s study identifies how Aboriginal peoples have been portrayed in Canadian history textbooks and how gaps in the history impact students. See: Clark, “Representations of Aboriginal People,” 96–98, 103–111. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Council of Ministers of Education, “Developments on Indian Residential Schools by Jurisdiction,” July 2014, email correspondence from Christy Bressette, Coordinator, Aboriginal Education, Council of Ministers of Education, Canada to Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 18 July 2014, TRC Document Number TRC3353. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Council of Ministers of Education, “Education Ministers Signal Transformation Key,” <a href="http://cmec.ca/278/Press-Releases/Education-Ministers-Signal-Transformation-Key-to-the-Future.html?id_article=826">http://cmec.ca/278/Press-Releases/Education-Ministers-Signal-Transformation-Key-to-the-Future.html?id_article=826</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Freedom of conscience and religion is protected under Section 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and Section 3 of Québec’s Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>S.L. v. Commission scolaire des Chênes,</em> 2012 SCC 7 (CanLII), p. 237. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Educator and scholar Marie Battiste’s work on decolonizing and transforming the education system has informed the Commission’s thinking on this issue. See: Battiste, <em>Decolonizing Education</em>, 175–191. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Education scholars Megan Boler and Michalinas Zembylas describe this way of teaching as a “pedagogy of discomfort” that requires both educators and students to “move outside their comfort zones” in constructive ways that can “radically alter their worldviews.” See: Boler and Zembylas, “Discomforting Truths,” 111. See also: Sheppard, “Creating a Caring Classroom.” <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example, studies by education scholars: Immordino-Yang and Domasio, “We Feel, Therefore We Learn”; Schonert-Reichl and Hymel, “Educating the Heart.” See also: Mary Gordon’s initiative, Roots of Empathy, “an evidence-based classroom program that has shown significant effect in reducing levels of aggression among school children while raising social/emotional competence and increasing empathy,” <a href="http://www.rootsofempathy.org/">http://www.rootsofempathy.org/</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). See also: Gordon, <em>Roots of Empathy</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Samantha Crowe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2014. Statement Number: ABNE401. For more information on the project, see: Ontario Provincial Advocate for Children and Youth, “Feathers of Hope: A First Nations Youth Action Plan, 2014,” <a href="http://www.inspiritfoundation.org/files/6114/0656/0111/Feathers-of-Hope_report.pdf">http://www.inspiritfoundation.org/files/6114/0656/0111/Feathers-of-Hope_report.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cultural theorist Roger Simon makes this point in an essay on the pedagogical practice of public history in the context of the Commission’s public education mandate. See: Simon, “Towards a Hopeful Practice,” 135–136. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The 2013 annual report of the Historical Thinking Project makes a similar point, arguing that the education system must produce historically literate citizens. See: Seixas and Colyer, “Report on the National Meeting,” 3, <a href="http://historicalthinking.ca/sites/default/files/files/docs/HTP2013Report.pdf">http://historicalthinking.ca/sites/default/files/files/docs/HTP2013Report.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). The purpose of the Historical Thinking Project was to provide history education resources for teachers to train students how to think critically and effectively about history. See: Seixas and Colver, “Report on the National Meeting,” 2, <a href="http://historicalthinking.ca/sites/default/files/files/docs/HTP2013Report.pdf">http://historicalthinking.ca/sites/default/files/files/docs/HTP2013Report.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Centre for Youth &amp; Society, “Residential Schools Resistance Narratives.” Videos available online at: <a href="http://youth.society.uvic.ca/TRC">http://youth.society.uvic.ca/TRC</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prairie Women’s Health Centre of Excellence, “Nitâpwewininân,” 3–7. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prairie Women’s Health Centre of Excellence, “Nitâpwewininân,” 14–16. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brooklyn Rae, Saskatchewan National Event Education Day, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 23 June 2013, video, Statement Number: SNE502, <a href="https://vimeo.com/48143907">https://vimeo.com/48143907</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Barney Williams, Saskatchewan National Event Education Day, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 23 June 2013, video, Statement Number: SNE502, <a href="https://vimeo.com/48143907">https://vimeo.com/48143907</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>ICTJ/Canada TRC Youth Retreat, <a href="http://vimeo.com/26397248">http://vimeo.com/26397248</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>ICTJ/Canada TRC Youth Retreat, <a href="http://vimeo.com/26128253">http://vimeo.com/26128253</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>International Center for Transitional Justice, “ICTJ Program Report,” <a href="http://www.ictj.org/news/ictj-program-report-children-and-youth">http://www.ictj.org/news/ictj-program-report-children-and-youth</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>International Center for Transitional Justice, “Youth Reporters Tell the Story,” <a href="http://ictj.org/news/youth-reporters-tell-story-residential-schools">http://ictj.org/news/youth-reporters-tell-story-residential-schools</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>International Center for Transitional Justice, “Our Legacy, Our Hope,” press release, 20 June 2012. Video, <em>Our Legacy, Our Hope,</em> at: <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xz2SUV0vFCI">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xz2SUV0vFCI</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>International Center for Transitional Justice, “ICTJ Program Report,” <a href="http://www.ictj.org/news/ictj-program-report-children-and-youth">http://www.ictj.org/news/ictj-program-report-children-and-youth</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Centre for Global Citizenship Education and Research, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 27 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE102. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bolton, “Museums Taken to Task,” 146–147. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Buchanan, “Decolonizing the Archives,” 44. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Morse, “Indigenous Human Rights,” 2, 10. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The decisions state that “the laws of evidence must be adapted in order that this type of evidence be accommodated and placed on an equal footing with the types of historic evidence that courts are familiar with, which largely consists of historical documents.” See: Reasons for Decision, <em>Delgamuukw v. British Columbia,</em> 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC), para. 87. On the honour of the Crown, see, for example: <em>R. v. Sparrow,</em> 1990 CanLII 104 (SCC); <em>Haida Nation v. British Columbia Minister of Forests,</em> 2004 CanLII 73 (SCC); <em>Delgamuukw v. British Columbia,</em> 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Legal scholar Bradford W. Morse makes this point. See: Morse, “Indigenous Human Rights,” 12, 26. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Report</em>, 5:232–233. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They have done so in accordance with their legislated mandate. Canada’s <em>Museums Act (1990)</em> provides the legislative framework for museums. See: <em>Museums Act (1990),</em> chapter 3, section 3, <a href="http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/PDF/M-13.4.pdf">http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/PDF/M-13.4.pdf</a>. The Act was amended in 2008 to include the Canadian Museum for Human Rights. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bolton, “Museums Taken to Task,” 151. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On December 12, 2013, Bill C-7, <em>An Act to amend the Museums Act in order to establish the Canadian Museum of History</em>, received Royal Assent, thus officially establishing the legislative authority to “rebrand” the Canadian Museum of Civilization. Neither the original <em>Museums Act</em> nor the amendment made specific reference to Aboriginal peoples. See: <a href="http://www.parl.gc.ca/LegisInfo/BillDetails.aspx?Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;billId=6263562&amp;View=3">http://www.parl.gc.ca/LegisInfo/BillDetails.aspx?Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;billId=6263562&amp;View=3</a>. See also: “Civilization Museum Now the Canadian Museum of History,” <em>CBC News,</em> December 12, 2013, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/civilization-museum-now-the-canadian-museum-of-history-1.2461738">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/civilization-museum-now-the-canadian-museum-of-history-1.2461738</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>House of Commons Standing Committee on Canadian Heritage, 41st Parliament, 1st session, June 5, 2013, <a href="http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?DocId=6209352&amp;Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;Parl=41&amp;Ses=1">http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?DocId=6209352&amp;Language=E&amp;Mode=1&amp;Parl=41&amp;Ses=1</a> (accessed 12 January 2014). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Canadian Museum of Civilization and the Canadian War Museum, Research Strategy, July 15, 2013, 7, <a href="http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf">http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Canadian Museum of Civilization and the Canadian War Museum, Research Strategy, July 15, 2013, 8–9, <a href="http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf">http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Canadian Museum of Civilization and the Canadian War Museum, Research Strategy, July 15, 2013, 10, <a href="http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf">http://www.civilization.ca/research-and-collections/files/2013/07/research-strategy.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Museum for Human Rights, <a href="https://humanrights.ca/about">https://humanrights.ca/about</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>President and CEO, Stuart Murray, Canadian Museum for Human Rights, Speech to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s National Research Centre Forum, March 3, 2011, Vancouver, BC, <a href="https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-truth-and-reconciliation">https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-truth-and-reconciliation</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jake Edmiston, “Indian Residential Schools or Settler Colonial Genocide? Native Group Slams Human Rights Museum over Exhibit Wording,” <em>National Post</em>, June 8, 2013, <a href="http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/indian-residential-schools-or-settler-colonial-genocide">http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/indian-residential-schools-or-settler-colonial-genocide</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Museum for Human Rights, Statement from the President and CEO: Use of “Genocide” in relation to treatment of Indigenous peoples in Canada, July 26, 2013, <a href="http://museumforhumanrights.ca/about-museum/news/statement-president-and-ceo-use-genocide-relation-treatment-indigenous-peoples">http://museumforhumanrights.ca/about-museum/news/statement-president-and-ceo-use-genocide-relation-treatment-indigenous-peoples</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canadian Museum for Human Rights, President and CEO Stuart Murray, speech delivered at “2017 Starts Now” forum, May 3, 2013, <a href="https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-cmhr-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-2017-starts-nowdebute">https://humanrights.ca/about-museum/news/speech-delivered-cmhr-president-and-ceo-stuart-murray-2017-starts-nowdebute</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, “Collection Development Framework,” March 30, 2005, 7–8, <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/003024/f2/003024-e.pdf">http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/003024/f2/003024-e.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, “Aboriginal Heritage,” <a href="http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/introduction.aspx#d">http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/introduction.aspx#d</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, “Native Residential Schools in Canada,” <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/native-residential/index-e.html">http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/native-residential/index-e.html</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wilson, “Peace, Order and Good Government,” 239. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“New Exhibition Reflecting the Uniqueness of the Inuit Experience of Residential Schools Launched at Library and Archives Canada,” media release, March 4, 2009, <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/013/013-380-e.html">http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/013/013-380-e.html</a>. See also: Legacy of Hope Foundation, <a href="http://wherearethechildren.ca/en">http://wherearethechildren.ca/en</a>; Legacy of Hope Foundation, <a href="http://weweresofaraway.ca/">http://weweresofaraway.ca/</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, “Legacy of the Residential School System,” <a href="http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/archives/archives-en/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/residential-schools-bibliography-2009.aspx">http://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/archives/archives-en/aboriginal-heritage/Pages/residential-schools-bibliography-2009.aspx</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, “Conducting Research on Residential Schools,” <a href="http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/020008/f2/020008-2000-e.pdf">http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/obj/020008/f2/020008-2000-e.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement, Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Mandate, Schedule N, 11, <a href="http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/File/pdfs/SCHEDULE_N_EN.pdf">http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/File/pdfs/SCHEDULE_N_EN.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 ONSC 684 (CanLII). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Professor Terry Cook, University of Manitoba, long-time archivist at the National Archives, Fellow of the Association of Canadian Archivists, and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, makes this point. See: Cook, “Evidence, Memory, Identity,” 111. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Commission on Human Rights, Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, <em>The Administration of Justice and the Human Rights of Detainees: Question of the Impunity of Perpetrators of Human Rights Violations (Civil and Political)</em> (revised final report prepared by Mr. Joinet to the Sub-commission decision 1996/199) UN Doc. E/ CN.4/Sub,2/1997/20/Rev.1, 1997-10-02; updated by UN DocE/CN.4/2005/102 (18 February 2005), and UN Doc E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1 (8 February 2005), cited in <em>Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 ONSC 684 (CanLII), University of Manitoba brief, Written Argument. December 13, 2012, note 35, 14, <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf">http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>de Greiff, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 2013, 22, <a href="http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UN-DOC/GEN/G13/165/05/PDF/G1316505.pdf?OpenElement">http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UN-DOC/GEN/G13/165/05/PDF/G1316505.pdf?OpenElement</a> (accessed 28 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>de Greiff, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 2013, 23, <a href="http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UN-DOC/GEN/G13/165/05/PDF/G1316505.pdf?OpenElement">http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UN-DOC/GEN/G13/165/05/PDF/G1316505.pdf?OpenElement</a> (accessed 28 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>de Greiff, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 2013, 29, <a href="http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UN-DOC/GEN/G13/165/05/PDF/G1316505.pdf?OpenElement">http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UN-DOC/GEN/G13/165/05/PDF/G1316505.pdf?OpenElement</a> (accessed 28 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Several prominent archivists have noted this trend. See, for example: Cook, “Evidence, Memory, Identity”; Wilson, “Peace, Order and Good Government”; Harris, “Archival Sliver”; Jimerson, “Archives for All.” <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Peter Cunningham, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 28 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE201. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Fausak is also General Council Liaison Minister, Indigenous Justice and Residential Schools, United Church of Canada. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Remembering the Children Society, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 29 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE302. Based on their experience, United Church of Canada staff, in collaboration with the Remembering the Children Society, developed an educational resource with guidelines for other communities wishing to develop their own commemoration projects for residential school cemeteries and unmarked burials. See: United Church of Canada, Residential Schools Update, January 2012, <a href="http://develop.united-church.ca/files/communications/newsletters/residential-schools-update_120101.pdf">http://develop.united-church.ca/files/communications/newsletters/residential-schools-update_120101.pdf</a> (accessed 16 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The United Church of Canada’s online resources are available at: <a href="http://thechildrenremembered.ca/">http://thechildrenremembered.ca/</a>. Anglican Church online resources and school histories are available at: <a href="http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/trc">http://www.anglican.ca/relationships/trc</a>. Presbyterian Church of Canada’s online resources are available at: <a href="http://www.presbyterianarchives.ca/RS%20-%20Home%20Page.html">http://www.presbyterianarchives.ca/RS%20-%20Home%20Page.html</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Church of Canada, Residential School Archive Project, “The Children Remembered,” <a href="http://thechildrenremembered.ca/about/">http://thechildrenremembered.ca/about/</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ian Wilson makes this point. See: Wilson, “Peace, Order and Good Government,” 238. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is based on the concept and philosophy of “sites of conscience,” as described by the International Coalition of Sites of Conscience, which is “a global network of historic sites, museums and memory initiatives connecting past struggles to today’s movements for human rights and social justice,” See: International Coalition of Sites of Conscience, <a href="http://www.sitesofconscience.org/">http://www.sitesofconscience.org/</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, “Sharing Truth: Creating a National Research Centre on Residential Schools,” Forum, Vancouver, British Columbia, March 1–4, 2011. Videos of the forum can be viewed at: <a href="http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=513">http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=513</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Georges Erasmus, Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, “Sharing Truth: Creating a National Research Centre on Residential Schools,” Forum, Vancouver, British Columbia, 2 March 2011, <a href="https://vimeo.com/207788339">https://vimeo.com/207788339</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Centre for Truth and Reconciliation Administrative Agreement, clauses 9 (c), (d), 11 (a), (e), <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Centre_For_Truth_and_Reconciliation_Administrative_Agreement.pdf">http://chrr.info/images/stories/Centre_For_Truth_and_Reconciliation_Administrative_Agreement.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As of April 2015, existing partners included: The National Association of Friendship Centres, Legacy of Hope Foundation, Canadian Museum for Human Rights, University of British Columbia, Lakehead University, University College of the North, University of Winnipeg, Red River College, Archives of Manitoba, University College of the North, L’Université de Saint-Boniface, St. John’s College, St. Paul’s College, Manitoba Museum, Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources, and the Sandy-Saulteaux Spiritual Centre. It is anticipated that more partners will be added as the centre develops. See: National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation, Our Partners, <a href="http://umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/partners.html">http://umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/partners.html</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 ONSC 684 (CanLII), University of Manitoba brief, Written Argument, December 13, 2012, 6–7, <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf">http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sue McKemmish, Shannon Faulkhead, and Lynette Russell, “Distrust in the Archive: Reconciling Records,” <em>Archival Science</em> 11 (2011): 212, cited in <em>Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 ONSC 684 (CanLII), University of Manitoba brief, Written Argument, December 13, 2011, 11, <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf">http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 ONSC 684 (CanLII), University of Manitoba brief, Written Argument, December 13, 2012, 11–12, <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf">http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Fontaine v. Canada (Attorney General),</em> 2013 ONSC 684 (CanLII), University of Manitoba brief, Written Argument, December 13, 2012, 12–13, <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf">http://chrr.info/images/stories/Materials_filed_by_UM_2_.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>University of Manitoba, “Historic Agreement Signed on National Aboriginal Day,” 21 June 2013, <a href="http://umanitoba.ca/news/blogs/blog/2013/06/21/historic-agreement-signed-on-national-aboriginal-day/">http://umanitoba.ca/news/blogs/blog/2013/06/21/historic-agreement-signed-on-national-aboriginal-day/</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such access will be “subject to privacy law and culturally appropriate protocols,” Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada and the University of Manitoba, Centre for Truth and Reconciliation Trust Deed, 21 June 2013, 3–4, <a href="http://umanitoba.ca/admin/indigenous_connect/media/IND-00-013-NRCAS-TrustDeed.pdf">http://umanitoba.ca/admin/indigenous_connect/media/IND-00-013-NRCAS-TrustDeed.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Centre for Truth and Reconciliation, <a href="http://umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/reconciliation.html">http://umanitoba.ca/centres/nctr/reconciliation.html</a> (accessed 16 April 2015). See also: Centre for Truth and Reconciliation Administrative Agreement, <a href="http://chrr.info/images/stories/Centre_For_Truth_and_Reconciliation_Administrative_Agreement.pdf">http://chrr.info/images/stories/Centre_For_Truth_and_Reconciliation_Administrative_Agreement.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jessica Bolduc, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE401. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Commission’s definition of “public memory” is based on the work of historians who study public memory. For example, James Opp and John C. Walsh define “public memory” as “memories that are made, experienced, and circulated in public spaces and that are intended to be communicated and shared,” See: Opp and Walsh, <em>Placing Memory</em>, 9. John Bodnar says that “public memory” is “a body of beliefs and ideas about the past that help [sic] a public or society understand both [sic] its past, present, and by implication, its future,” See: Bodnar, <em>Remaking America</em>, 15. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Historian W. James Booth makes this important point in his study of how communities of memory are established, maintained, or disrupted through everyday habits and practices. See: Booth, <em>Communities of Memory</em>, 45. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In its report “Strengthening Indigenous Rights through Truth Commissions: A Practitioner’s Resource,” the International Center for Transitional Justice identifies four thematic areas where commissions must rethink widely held assumptions in the field of transitional justice in order to become more responsive to Indigenous rights. These include: a) moving beyond a state-centric approach; b) moving beyond an individualistic form of analysis; c) moving beyond a focus only on recent violations; and d) moving beyond an overreliance on archival and written sources. See: International Center for Transitional Justice, “Strengthening Indigenous Rights,” 3–5, <a href="https://www.ictj.org/sites/default/files/ICTJ-Truth-Seeking-Indigenous-Rights-2012-English.pdf">https://www.ictj.org/sites/default/files/ICTJ-Truth-Seeking-Indigenous-Rights-2012-English.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Chamberlin, <em>If This Is Your Land</em>, 238–239. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Schirch, <em>Ritual and Symbol</em>, 1–2. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, “Atlantic National Event Concept Paper,” 4, <a href="http://www.myrobust.com/websites/atlantic/File/Concept%20Paper%20atlantic%20august%2010%20km_cp%20_3_.pdf">http://www.myrobust.com/websites/atlantic/File/Concept%20Paper%20atlantic%20august%2010%20km_cp%20_3_.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 2015, the Bentwood Box was on temporary loan to the Canadian Museum for Human Rights, where it was part of a public exhibit. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Campbell, “Remembering for the Future,” 30. See also: Campbell, <em>Our Faithfulness to the Past</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Qwul’sih’yah’maht (Thomas), “Honouring the Oral Traditions,” 253. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Charles Cardinal, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, St. Paul, Alberta, 7 January 2011, Statement Number: 01-AB-06JA11-005. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Laurie McDonald, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Beausejour, Manitoba, 4 September 2010, Statement Number: 01-MB-3-6SE10-005. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Victoria Grant-Boucher, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 25 February 2011, Statement Number: 01-ON-05-FE11-004. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Desarae Eashappie, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 19 June 2010, Statement Number: SC112. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regan, <em>Unsettling the Settler Within</em>, 13. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Florence Kaefer, Statement to Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC111. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Teacher Seeks Healing through Truth Commission,” <em>CBC News, Manitoba,</em> June 18, 2010, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/story/2010/06/18/mb-truth-reconciliation-healing-teachers-winnipeg.html">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/story/2010/06/18/mb-truth-reconciliation-healing-teachers-winnipeg.html</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jack Lee, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC111. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mark DeWolf, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 28 October 2011, Statement Number: SC075. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Tina Keeper, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 24 June 2013, Statement Number: SNE403. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, the Right Honourable Paul Martin, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Montreal, Québec, 26 April 2013, Statement Number: QNE303. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, the Right Honourable Joe Clark, Statement to Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 23 June 2012, Statement Number: SNE301. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Andy Scott, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2012, Statement Number: SNE203. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Therese Boullard, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 28 June 2011, Statement Number: NNE103. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ginelle Giacomin, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 19 June 2010, Statement Number: SC112. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: Cohen, Varea, and Walker, <em>Acting Together</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>van Erven and Gardner, “Performing Cross-Cultural Conversations,” 41. Quote from Francois Matarraso in correspondence with van Erven, March 19, 2008. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>David Garneau, artist, writer, curator, and professor of visual arts, makes this critical point. See: Garneau, “Imaginary Spaces,” 38. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Garneau, “Imaginary Spaces,” 33–34. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Archibald et al., <em>Dancing, Singing, Painting</em>, 18. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Andrea Ratuski, “Residential School Art Series Awarded to U of M,” <em>CBC News</em>, September 24, 2013, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/scene/residential-school-art-series-awarded-to-u-of-m-1.1865994">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/scene/residential-school-art-series-awarded-to-u-of-m-1.1865994</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Morris and Helen Belkin Art Gallery, <a href="http://www.belkin.ubc.ca/past/witnesses">http://www.belkin.ubc.ca/past/witnesses</a> (accessed 16 April 2015); University of British Columbia Museum of Anthropology, <a href="http://moa.ubc.ca/portfolio_page/speaking-to-memory/">http://moa.ubc.ca/portfolio_page/speaking-to-memory/</a> (accessed 16 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Robertson, “Threads of Hope,” 87, 99–101. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>University of Winnipeg, “UWinnipeg Healing Quilt Gifted to TRC Commissioners,” 17 June 2010, <a href="http://www.uwinnipeg.ca/index/uw-news-action/story.364/title.uwinnipeg-healing-quilt-gifted-to-trc-commissioner">http://www.uwinnipeg.ca/index/uw-news-action/story.364/title.uwinnipeg-healing-quilt-gifted-to-trc-commissioner</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dewar et al., “Practicing Reconciliation,” 5–6. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Full descriptions of the 2011–12 commemoration projects can be found online at: <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974213551/1370974338097">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974213551/1370974338097</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). For 2012–13 commemoration projects, see: <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974253896/1370974471675">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370974253896/1370974471675</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hague defines place as “a geographic space that is defined by meanings, sentiments and stories rather than by a set of co-ordinates.” See: Cliff Hague, “Planning and Place Identity,” in Cliff Hague and Paul Jenkins, eds., <em>Place Identity, Participation and Planning</em> (New York, 2005), 4, cited in Opp and Walsh, <em>Placing Memory</em>, 5. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alan S. Hale, “Treaty 3 Holds Commemoration Ceremony for Survivors of District Residential School System,” <em>Kenora Daily Miner and News</em>, March 25, 2014, <a href="http://www.kenoradailyminerandnews.com/2014/03/25/treaty-3-holds-commemoration-ceremony-for-survivors-of-district-residential-school-system">http://www.kenoradailyminerandnews.com/2014/03/25/treaty-3-holds-commemoration-ceremony-for-survivors-of-district-residential-school-system</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Debora Steel, “Alberni Residential Students Reunited with Childhood Art,” <em>Ha-Shilth-Sa</em>, 2 April 2013, <a href="http://www.hashilthsa.com/news/2013-04-03/alberni-indian-residential-students-reunited-childhood-art">http://www.hashilthsa.com/news/2013-04-03/alberni-indian-residential-students-reunited-childhood-art</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Judith Lavoie, “Paintings Bear Witness to B.C. Residential Schools’ Harsh Life,” <em>Victoria Times-Colonist,</em> March 31, 2013, <a href="http://www.timescolonist.com/news/local/paintings-bear-witness-to-b-c-residential-schools-harsh-life-1.101179">http://www.timescolonist.com/news/local/paintings-bear-witness-to-b-c-residential-schools-harsh-life-1.101179</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, “Remembering the Past,” http:// <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1332859355145/1332859433503">www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1332859355145/1332859433503</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Christi Belcourt, Speech at dedication ceremony for the stained-glass window on Parliament Hill, November 26, 2012, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370613921985/1370613942308">https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370613921985/1370613942308</a>. A detailed description of the window is available at: Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1353338933878/1353338974873">https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1353338933878/1353338974873</a> (accessed 30 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Commissioner Wilton Littlechild, Speech at dedication ceremony for the stained-glass window on Parliament Hill, November 26, 2012, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, <a href="https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370615213241/1370615618980">https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1370615213241/1370615618980</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Opp and Walsh, <em>Placing Memory</em>, 15–16. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Historic Sites and Monuments Act,</em> Revised Statutes of Canada 1985, chapter H-4, <a href="http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/PDF/H-4.pdf">http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/PDF/H-4.pdf</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parks Canada, Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada, <a href="http://www.pc.gc.ca/clmhc-hsmbc/comm-board/Transparence-Transparency.aspx">http://www.pc.gc.ca/clmhc-hsmbc/comm-board/Transparence-Transparency.aspx</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parks Canada, Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada, National Program of Historical Commemoration, <a href="http://www.pc.gc.ca/clmhc-hsmbc/ncp-pcn.aspx">http://www.pc.gc.ca/clmhc-hsmbc/ncp-pcn.aspx</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Joinet-Orentlicher Principles</em>, cited in United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 8, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx">http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 14, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx">http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 19, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx">http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx</a>. The Special Rapporteur is referencing the commemoration projects undertaken as part of the Settlement Agreement. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 20–21, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx">http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 21–22, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx">http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Human Rights Council, “Report of the Special Rapporteur,” 22, <a href="http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx">http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Pages/ListReports.aspx</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The study was based on research conducted by Trina Cooper-Bolam and based in part on her experiences as the Legacy of Hope’s former executive director, her work with the Aboriginal Healing Foundation, and her role as a project leader for the Assembly of First Nations and the Aboriginal Healing Foundation’s national commemoration project. See: Cooper-Bolam, “Healing Heritage,” 8–9, 106–107. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cooper-Bolam, “Healing Heritage,” 108–109. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cooper-Bolam, “Healing Heritage,” 109. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cooper-Bolam, “Healing Heritage,” 61–63. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jeff Corntassel et al., “Indigenous Story-telling, Truth-telling and Community Approaches to Reconciliation,” <em>English Studies in Canada</em> 35, 1 (2009): 143, cited in Cooper-Bolam, “Healing Heritage,” 98. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cooper-Bolam, “Healing Heritage,” 97–99. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cooper-Bolam, “Healing Heritage,” ii. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Broadcasting Act</em> (1991), last revised 2014, <a href="http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/PDF/B-9.01.pdf">http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/PDF/B-9.01.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>David, “Aboriginal Languages Broadcasting in Canada,” 14, <a href="http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/Aboriginal_Language_and_Broadcasting_2004.pdf">http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/Aboriginal_Language_and_Broadcasting_2004.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>CBC/Radio-Canada, “Going the Distance,” 48. The annual report also provides information on CBC’s Aboriginal-languages programming and news coverage. See: <a href="http://www.cbc.radio-canada.ca/_files/cbcrc/documents/annual-report/2013-2014/cbc-radio-canada-annual-report-2013-2014.pdf">http://www.cbc.radio-canada.ca/_files/cbcrc/documents/annual-report/2013-2014/cbc-radio-canada-annual-report-2013-2014.pdf</a>. In 2013, Statistics Canada published this data as part of the National Household Survey conducted in 2011. See: Statistics Canada, <em>Aboriginal Peoples in Canada</em>, <em>2011</em>, 4, <a href="http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011001-eng.pdf">http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-x/99-011-x2011001-eng.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aboriginal Peoples Television Network, Annual Report, 2013, <a href="http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/APTN_2013_AnnualReport_ENG.pdf">http://aptn.ca/corporate/PDFs/APTN_2013_AnnualReport_ENG.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aboriginal Peoples Television Network, Corporate Factsheet, <a href="http://aptn.ca/corporate/facts.php">http://aptn.ca/corporate/facts.php</a> (accessed 18 March 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Report</em>, 5:103–104. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Report</em>, 2:614. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: Anderson and Robertson, <em>Seeing Red</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Journalists for Human Rights is a media development organization that provides education and resources to “help journalists build their capacity to report ethically and effectively on human rights and governance issues in their communities.” See: <a href="http://www.jhr.ca/en/aboutjhr_learn-about.php">http://www.jhr.ca/en/aboutjhr_learn-about.php</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Journalists for Human Rights, “Buried Voices,” August 2013, 18–19, <a href="http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1">http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Journalists for Human Rights, “Buried Voices,” 5–6, <a href="http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1">http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Journalists for Human Rights, “Buried Voices,” 16, <a href="http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1">http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Journalists for Human Rights, “Buried Voices,” 19, <a href="http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1">http://www.documentcloud.org/documents/784473-media-coverage-of-aboriginal-issues.html#document/p1</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Lethal Legacy</em>, vi. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, “Ipperwash and the Media,” 11, 14. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, “Ipperwash and the Media,” 19–20, 22–23. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Theodore Fontaine, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 28 March 2014, Statement Number: AB202. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Laura Robinson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 28 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE202. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Law Society Throws Support behind Reconciliation Initiatives,” <em>Gazette: Law Society of Upper Canada</em>, 11 December 2014, <a href="http://www.lawsocietygazette.ca/news/law-society-throws-support-behind-reconciliation-initiatives/">http://www.lawsocietygazette.ca/news/law-society-throws-support-behind-reconciliation-initiatives/</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mason and Koehli, “Barriers to Physical Activity,” 103–105. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Physical Activity and Sport Act,</em> <a href="http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/P-13.4/page-1.html?texthighlight=under-represented#s-5">http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/P-13.4/page-1.html?texthighlight=under-represented#s-5</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>IndigenACTION, “Roundtable Report,” appendix 2, 18–19, <a href="http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/indigenaction/indigenactionroundtablereport.pdf">http://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/indigenaction/indigenactionroundtablereport.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Te Hiwi, “What Is the Spirit,” 3. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sport Canada, Policy Renewal, “Summary Report,” July 15, 2011, 4, <a href="https://sirc.ca/sites/default/files/content/docs/pdf/aboriginal.pdf">https://sirc.ca/sites/default/files/content/docs/pdf/aboriginal.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Canadian Sport Policy</em>, <a href="http://canadiansporttourism.com/sites/default/files/docs/csp2012_en_lr.pdf">http://canadiansporttourism.com/sites/default/files/docs/csp2012_en_lr.pdf</a> (acessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, David Courchene <abbr>Jr.</abbr>, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 25 June 2014, Statement Number: SE048. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ian Campbell, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 25 June 2014, Statement Number: SE048. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jeff Lee, “Tsilhqot’in Nation Strikes Conciliatory Note with Municipalities,” <em>Vancouver Sun,</em> September 24, 2014, A6. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Northern Frontier, Northern Homeland,</em> 1:1, 82–83. Beginning in the 1980s, several land-claims agreements were signed across the North, including the Inuvialuit Final Agreement (1984), the Gwich’in Comprehensive Land Claim Agreement (1992), the Sahtu Dene and Métis Comprehensive Land Claim Agreement (1994), and the Tlicho Agreement (2005) in the Northwest Territories.</p>
					<p>Although there have been attempts to revitalize the Mackenzie Valley pipeline project, with the participation of a coalition of Aboriginal partners, as of 2014, it remained unclear as to whether the project would proceed. See: Brent Jang, “Gas Exports from B.C. Seen as Key to Reviving Pipeline,” <em>Globe and Mail,</em> February 2, 2014, <a href="http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/energy-and-resources/gas-exports-from-bc-said-key-to-reviving-pipeline/article16657138/">http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/energy-and-resources/gas-exports-from-bc-said-key-to-reviving-pipeline/article16657138/</a>; Jeff Lewis, “Northwest Territories Eyes Revival of Mackenzie Valley Pipeline Project,” <em>Financial Post,</em> June 11, 2013, <a href="http://business.financialpost.com/2013/06/11/northwest-territories-eyes-revival-of-mackenzie-valley-pipeline-project/?__lsa=c5d4-608a">http://business.financialpost.com/2013/06/11/northwest-territories-eyes-revival-of-mackenzie-valley-pipeline-project/?__lsa=c5d4-608a</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, <em>Report</em>, 1:466–504. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example: <em>Delgamuukw v. British Columbia</em>, 1997 CanLII 302 (SCC); <em>Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests)</em>, 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII); <em>Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of Canadian Heritage),</em> 2005 SCC 69 (CanLII); <em>Rio Tinto Alcan Inc. v. Carrier Sekani Tribal Council,</em> 2010 SCC 43; <em>Tsilhqot’in Nation v. British Columbia</em>, 2014 SCC 44; <em>Grassy Narrows First Nation v. Ontario (Natural Resources)</em>, 2014 SCC 48. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Delgamuukw v. British Columbia</em>, 1997 CanLII 302 SCC, para. 165. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests)</em>, 2004 SCC 73 (CanLII), para. 53, cited in Newman, <em>Rule and Role of Law</em>, 10, <a href="http://www.macdonaldlaurier.ca/files/pdf/DutyToConsult-Final.pdf">http://www.macdonaldlaurier.ca/files/pdf/DutyToConsult-Final.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Newman, <em>Rule and Role of Law</em>, 13, <a href="http://www.macdonaldlaurier.ca/files/pdf/DutyToConsult-Final.pdf">http://www.macdonaldlaurier.ca/files/pdf/DutyToConsult-Final.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Public Policy Forum, “Building Authentic Partnerships,” 7. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Public Policy Forum, “Building Authentic Partnerships,” 6. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Eyford, “Forging Partnerships,” 3, 7, <a href="https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/www/pdf/publications/ForgPart-Online-e.pdf">https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/www/pdf/publications/ForgPart-Online-e.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter of transmission from Douglas R. Eyford to Prime Minister, 29 November 2013, in Eyford, “Forging Partnerships,” np, <a href="https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/www/pdf/publications/ForgPart-Online-e.pdf">https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/www/pdf/publications/ForgPart-Online-e.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Charrette on Energy, Environment and Aboriginal Issues, “Responsible Energy Resource Development,” 2. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Charrette on Energy, Environment and Aboriginal Issues, “Responsible Energy Resource Development.” <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Charrette on Energy, Environment and Aboriginal Issues, “Responsible Energy Resource Development,” 8–14. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Coates and Newman, <em>End Is Not Nigh</em>, 21. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>United Nations Global Compact, <em>Business Reference Guide</em>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Wab Kinew, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 28 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE202. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Victoria Wells, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: SP016. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Lynne Phillips, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 5 December 2010, Statement Number: 01-BC-03DE10-007. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Roger Epp, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: SP125. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bill Elliot, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Hobbema, Alberta, 25 July 2013, Statement Number: SP125. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Bill Elliot, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 29 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE301. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reconciliation Canada, “City of Vancouver Council Unanimously Support,” <a href="http://reconciliationcanada.ca/city-of-vancouver-council-unanimously-support-city-of-reconciliation-framework/">http://reconciliationcanada.ca/city-of-vancouver-council-unanimously-support-city-of-reconciliation-framework/</a>. See also: Report from City Manager to Vancouver City Council, “Framework for City of Reconciliation,” <a href="http://former.vancouver.ca/ctyclerk/cclerk/20141028/documents/rr1.pdf">http://former.vancouver.ca/ctyclerk/cclerk/20141028/documents/rr1.pdf</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Gregor Robertson, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE102. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kim Harvey, <em>Be the Change: Young People Healing the Past and Building the Future</em>, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE105, <a href="https://vimeo.com/78638476">https://vimeo.com/78638476</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kevin Takahide Lee, <em>Be the Change: Young People Healing the Past and Building the Future</em>, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE105, <a href="https://vimeo.com/78638476">https://vimeo.com/78638476</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Caroline Wong, <em>Be the Change: Young People Healing the Past and Building the Future</em>, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE105, <a href="https://vimeo.com/78638476">https://vimeo.com/78638476</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Danny Richmond, <em>Be the Change: Young People Healing the Past and Building the Future</em>, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE105, <a href="https://vimeo.com/78638476">https://vimeo.com/78638476</a>. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Akua Benjamin, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 12 November 2013, Statement Number: SE036B. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ali Kazimi, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 12 November 2013, Statement Number: SE036B. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Winnie Ng, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 12 November 2013, Statement Number: SE036B. <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Canada, <em>Discover Canada</em>, <a href="http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/discover/index.asp">http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/discover/index.asp</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Canada, <em>Discover Canada</em>, <a href="http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/discover/index.asp">http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/discover/index.asp</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Video recordings of the Walk for Reconciliation are available at: Reconciliation Canada, <a href="http://reconciliationcanada.ca/2013/09/">http://reconciliationcanada.ca/2013/09/</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elders Statement, “A Shared Tomorrow.” The statement and video recording of the Elders Circle are available at: Reconciliation Canada, <a href="http://reconciliationcanada.ca/explore/elders-statement/">http://reconciliationcanada.ca/explore/elders-statement/</a> (accessed 15 April 2015). <a href="thechallengeofreconciliation.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
