<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-CA">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes - Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes_intro" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2>Endnotes</h2>
			<h3>Introduction</h3>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For coercion, see: Ray, <em>Illustrated History</em>, 151–152. For fraud, see: Upton, “Origins of Canadian Indian Policy,” 56. For failure to implement Treaties, see: Sprague, <em>Canada’s Treaties with Aboriginal People</em>, 13. For taking land without Treaty, see Fisher, <em>Contact and Conflict</em>. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples from Saskatchewan, see: Miller, <em>Skyscrapers Hide the Heavens</em>, 222; Stonechild, “Indian View,” 263; Wiebe, “Mistahimaskwa,” <a href="http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/mistahimaskwa_11E.html">http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/mistahimaskwa_11E.html</a> (accessed 14 July 2014). <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Barron, “Indian Pass System.” <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example, see: <em>An Act to amend and consolidate the laws respecting Indians</em>, Statutes of Canada 1880, chapter 28, section 72, reproduced in Venne, <em>Indian Acts</em>, 75. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples, see Brown. “Economic Organization and the Position of Women;” Fiske, “Fishing Is Women’s Business;” Klein, “Mother as Clanswoman.” <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>An Act for the gradual enfranchisement of Indians</em>, Statutes of Canada 1869, chapter 42, reproduced in Venne, <em>Indian Acts</em>, 11. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example, see: <em>An Act further to amend “The Indian Act, 1880</em>,” Statutes of Canada 1884, chapter 27, section 3, reproduced in Venne, <em>Indian Acts</em>, 93. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, House of Commons Debates (9 May 1883), 1107–1108. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 6810, file 470-2-3, volume 7, Evidence of D. C. Scott to the Special Committee of the House of Commons Investigating the Indian Act amendments of 1920, (L-2)(N-3). <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, “Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian Policy,” page 20 of 24-page portable document format file. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, <em>Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs, 1931</em>, 60. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Indian Residential Schools Settlement – Official Court Website, <a href="http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/schools.html">http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/schools.html</a> (accessed 5 February 2015). <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prime Minister Stephen Harper, Statement of Apology – to former students of Indian Residential Schools, 11 June 2008, <a href="http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100015644/1100100015649">http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1100100015644/1100100015649</a>. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, Library and Archives Canada, RG10, volume 7936, file 32-104, J. W. House to G. H. Gooderham, 26 January 1942. [OLD-004156-0001] <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Special Joint Committee, 1947, 1474. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canada, Special Joint Committee, 1947, 1508–1509. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, The Presbyterian Church in Canada Archives, Toronto, ON, Acc. 1988-7004, box 46, file 1, “Cecilia Jeffrey Indian Residential School,” J. C. E. Andrews, 1953, 36. [NCA-009046] <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, NRA, INAC – Resolution Sector – IRS Historical Files Collection – Ottawa, GRS Files, box 1A, file 43, Albert Southard, 8 March 1957. [IRC-040039] <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Renaud, “Indian Education Today,” 30. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Alma Mann Scott, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-016. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For further information on these issues, see the Legacy section below. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Media coverage on the call for an inquiry on missing and murdered Aboriginal women has been extensive. See, for example: “Women’s Memorial March in Vancouver Attracts Hundreds,” <em>CBC News</em>, 14 February 2015, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/womens-memorial-march-in-vancouver-attracts-hundreds-1.2957930">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/womens-memorial-march-in-vancouver-attracts-hundreds-1.2957930</a>; “Murdered and Missing Aboriginal Women Deserve Inquiry, Rights Group Says<em>,” CBC News</em>, 12 January 2015, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/murdered-and-missing-aboriginal-women-deserve-inquiry-rights-group-says-1.2897707">http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/murdered-and-missing-aboriginal-women-deserve-inquiry-rights-group-says-1.2897707</a>; Ken S. Coates, “Aboriginal Women Deserve Much More than an Inquiry,” <em>National Post</em>, 16 February 2015, <a href="http://news.nationalpost.com/2015/02/16/ken-s-coates-aboriginal-women-deserve-much-more-than-an-inquiry/">http://news.nationalpost.com/2015/02/16/ken-s-coates-aboriginal-women-deserve-much-more-than-an-inquiry/</a>.</p>
					<p>On economic development issues, see, for example: Jeff Lewis, “TransCanada CEO Says Canada Needs to Resolve Conflicts over Pipelines,” <em>Globe and Mail</em>, 4 February 2015, <a href="http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/economy/transcanada-ceo-says-canada-needs-to-resolve-conflicts-over-pipelines/article22798276/">http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/economy/transcanada-ceo-says-canada-needs-to-resolve-conflicts-over-pipelines/article22798276/</a>; Daniel Schwartz and Mark Gollom, “NB Fracking Protests and the Fight for Aboriginal Rights,” <em>CBC News Canada</em>, 19 October 2013, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/n-b-fracking-protests-and-the-fight-for-aboriginal-rights-1.2126515">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/n-b-fracking-protests-and-the-fight-for-aboriginal-rights-1.2126515</a>; Michael MacDonald, “Shale Gas Conflict in New Brunswick Underscores Historical Grievances, Rights of First Nations,” <em>Toronto Star</em>, 25 December 2013, <a href="http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/12/25/shale_gas_conflict_in_new_brunswick_underscores_historic_grievances_rights_of_first_nations.html">http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2013/12/25/shale_gas_conflict_in_new_brunswick_underscores_historic_grievances_rights_of_first_nations.html</a>. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the role of the courts in Aboriginal rights and reconciliation, see: Joseph Brean, “‘Reconciliation’ with First Nations, Not the Charter of Rights &amp; Freedoms, Will Define the Supreme Court in Coming years, Chief Justice Says,” <em>National Post</em>, 13 March 2014, <a href="http://news.nationalpost.com/2014/03/13/reconciliation-with-first-nations-not-the-charter-of-rights-freedoms-will-define-the-supreme-court-in-coming-years-chief-justice-says/">http://news.nationalpost.com/2014/03/13/reconciliation-with-first-nations-not-the-charter-of-rights-freedoms-will-define-the-supreme-court-in-coming-years-chief-justice-says/</a>.</p>
					<p>On Aboriginal rights cases, see, for example: “6 Landmark Rulings on Native Rights,” <em>CBC News</em>, 8 January 2013, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/6-landmark-rulings-on-native-rights-1.1316961">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/6-landmark-rulings-on-native-rights-1.1316961</a>. On day schools litigation, see, for example: “Residential School Day Scholars Launch Class-action Lawsuit,” <em>CBC News</em>, 16 August 2012, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/residential-school-day-scholars-launch-class-action-lawsuit-1.1146607">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/residential-school-day-scholars-launch-class-action-lawsuit-1.1146607</a>;</p>
					<p>Dene Moore, “Federal Appeal Court Gives Ok on Hearing First Nations’ Day-school Suit,” <em>Canadian Press</em>, 4 March 2014, <a href="http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/federal-appeal-court-gives-ok-on-hearing-first-nations-day-school-suit-1.1713809">http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/federal-appeal-court-gives-ok-on-hearing-first-nations-day-school-suit-1.1713809</a>. On Sixties Scoop legislation, see, for example: “Sixties Scoop Case Moves Forward as Class-action Lawsuit,” <em>CBC News</em>, 3 December 2014, <a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/sixties-scoop-case-moves-forward-as-class-action-lawsuit-1.2859332">http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/thunder-bay/sixties-scoop-case-moves-forward-as-class-action-lawsuit-1.2859332</a>; Diana Mehta, “‘Sixties Scoop’ Class-action Lawsuit to Proceed,” <em>Canadian Press</em>, 4 December 2014, <a href="http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/60s-scoop-class-action-lawsuit-to-proceed-1.2132317">http://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/60s-scoop-class-action-lawsuit-to-proceed-1.2132317</a>. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miller, <em>Lethal Legacy</em>, vi. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Mary Deleary, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 26 June 2014, Statement Number: SE049. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Archie Little. Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: SP135. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>McKay, “Expanding the Dialogue,” 107. McKay was the first Aboriginal moderator of the United Church of Canada (1992 to 1994). <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jessica Bolduc, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2014, Statement Number: ABNE401. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>Educating our Youth</em>, video, Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, 19 September 2013, <a href="http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=3">http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/index.php?p=3</a> (accessed 10 February 2014). <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Patsy George, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 21 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE404. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Dave Courchene, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 25 June 2014, Statement Number: SE048. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The mandate of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission is listed under Schedule N of the Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement, <a href="http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/settlement.html">http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/settlement.html</a> (accessed 5 March 2015). In accordance with the TRC’s mandate, the Commission was required to recognize “the significance of Aboriginal oral and legal traditions in its activities,” Schedule N, 4(d); and “witness, support, promote and facilitate truth and reconciliation events at both the national and community levels,” Schedule N, 1(c). The term <em>witness</em> “refers to the Aboriginal principle of ‘witnessing,’” Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement, Schedule N, 1(c), n1</p>
					<p>Aboriginal oral history, legal traditions, and the principle of witnessing have deep historical roots and contemporary relevance for reconciliation. Indigenous law was used to resolve family and community conflict, to establish Treaties among various Indigenous nations, and to negotiate nation-to-nation treaties with the Crown. For a comprehensive history of Aboriginal–Crown Treaty making from contact to the present, see: Miller, <em>Compact, Contract, Covenant</em>. The term <em>witness</em> is in reference to the Aboriginal principle of witnessing, which varies among First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples. Generally speaking, witnesses are called to be the keepers of history when an event of historic significance occurs. Through witnessing, the event or work that is undertaken is validated and provided legitimacy. The work could not take place without honoured and respected guests to witness it. Witnesses are asked to store and care for the history they witness and to share it with their own people when they return home. For Aboriginal peoples, the act of witnessing these events comes with a great responsibility to remember all the details and be able to recount them accurately as the foundation of oral histories. See: Thomas, “Honouring the Oral Traditions,” 243–244. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Jim Dumont, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 26 June 2014, Statement Number: SE049. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Wilfred Whitehawk, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Key First Nation, Saskatchewan, 21 January 2012, Statement Number: SP039. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Vitaline Elsie Jenner, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: 02-MB-16JU10-131. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Daniel Elliot, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 13 April 2012, Statement Number: SP135. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Clement Chartier, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 June 2013, Statement Number: SNE202. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Steven Point, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 20 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE304. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Merle Nisley, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, 14 December 2011, Statement Number: 2011-4199. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Tom Cavanaugh, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 14 April 2012, Statement Number: SP137. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Ina Seitcher, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Victoria, British Columbia, 14 April 2012, Statement Number: SP136. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Evelyn Brockwood, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 18 June 2010, Statement Number: SC110. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Indian Residential Schools Settlement Agreement, Schedule N, Principles, 1, <a href="http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/settlement.html">http://www.residentialschoolsettlement.ca/settlement.html</a> (accessed 5 March 2015). <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Johnston, “Aboriginal Traditions,” 141–159. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Barney Williams, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 26 June 2014, Statement Number: SE049. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Stephen Augustine, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 25 June 2014, Statement Number: SE048. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Reg Crowshoe, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 26 June 2014, Statement Number: SE049. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Kirby Littletent, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 16 January 2012, Statement Number: SP035. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Simone (last name not provided), Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 1 July 2011, Statement Number: SC092. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Patrick Etherington, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 17 June 2010, Statement Number: SC108. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Maxine Lacorne, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 29 June 2011, Statement Number: SC090. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Barney Williams, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Vancouver, British Columbia, 21 September 2013, Statement Number: BCNE404. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Hon. Chuck Strahl, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 16 June 2010, Statement Number: SC093. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Archbishop Fred Hiltz, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Inuvik, Northwest Territories, 1 July 2011, Statement Number: NNE402. <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>TRC, AVS, Anonymous, Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada, Regina, Saskatchewan, 17 January 2012, Statement Number: SP036.<!--linkrefid=55--> <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
